[Guest]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: This, however, is only half the story.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a brilliant historian,
[Amit Varma]: Ira Mukherjee, and we'll be talking
[Amit Varma]: about her book, Daughters of the Sun,
[Amit Varma]: Empresses, Queens and Begums of the
[Amit Varma]: Mughal Empire, which was an
[Amit Varma]: eye-opening read for me, demolishing
[Amit Varma]: all my notions of what women of the
[Amit Varma]: Mughal era would have been like, with their
[Amit Varma]: opulence and their harems and their
[Amit Varma]: subservience to all-powerful emperors.
[Amit Varma]: On the contrary, I discovered a complex
[Amit Varma]: world in which women were major players,
[Amit Varma]: jostling for power, shaping
[Amit Varma]: major events, and many in ways that
[Amit Varma]: would be invisible to foreign
[Amit Varma]: historians or even male historians
[Amit Varma]: from India. Ira's previous
[Amit Varma]: book, Heroines, was
[Amit Varma]: also about powerful women either
[Amit Varma]: forgotten or reshaped by historians.
[Amit Varma]: But it's Daughters of the Sun
[Amit Varma]: and its remarkable Mughal women that
[Amit Varma]: we'll be focusing on today, after
[Amit Varma]: a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I want to thank Intel
[Amit Varma]: for supporting The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: If you haven't already, I recommend you
[Amit Varma]: check out Intel vPro. Intel
[Amit Varma]: vPro is a business platform that maximizes
[Amit Varma]: the performance of your company's
[Amit Varma]: computers. One of the ways in which it
[Amit Varma]: does this is by maximizing stability
[Amit Varma]: through the Intel Stable Image
[Amit Varma]: Platform Program, or SIPP.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I get pretty upset when
[Amit Varma]: some software that was working perfectly
[Amit Varma]: well starts acting up because
[Amit Varma]: an update went wrong somewhere. The SIPP,
[Amit Varma]: the Intel Stable Image
[Amit Varma]: Platform Program, avoids
[Amit Varma]: this by ensuring stability of your
[Amit Varma]: infrastructure. A minimum number of
[Amit Varma]: software or hardware updates and predictable
[Amit Varma]: transitions from one generation
[Amit Varma]: of technology to the next.
[Amit Varma]: Your moody machine ain't gonna hang on
[Amit Varma]: you no more. For more details,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to Intel.in
[Amit Varma]: slash vPro. That's V-P-R-O.
[Amit Varma]: Intel.in slash vPro
[Amit Varma]: because stability is everything.
[Amit Varma]: Ira, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me here. Ira, tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about yourself. How did you, sort of,
[Amit Varma]: where did you study? What did you do?
[Amit Varma]: How did you get to where you are?
[Guest]: So, I'm a little bit of an
[Guest]: accidental writer of history
[Guest]: because I'm not an historian.
[Guest]: I'm actually a
[Guest]: scientist by training, all those
[Guest]: many years ago. And it was just
[Guest]: something that, you know, I did
[Guest]: because in those days, when
[Guest]: you were a capable student, you were kind of
[Guest]: and you were alright in the sciences, you were
[Guest]: pushed towards that. And literature,
[Guest]: which I was also interested in, was not
[Guest]: considered a suitable or serious
[Guest]: enough career option.
[Guest]: So I did sciences, I did it for quite a while
[Guest]: and then it just so happened that
[Guest]: nothing in it really interested me as a career
[Guest]: to continue in. And then
[Guest]: as is the case, I think,
[Guest]: for many women, especially, and
[Guest]: especially of my generation,
[Guest]: things took maybe a backseat
[Guest]: and other things take over. Your life, you know,
[Guest]: family responsibilities and
[Guest]: just other things that you have to do.
[Guest]: And I didn't work for a while.
[Guest]: And then when my children were born and they were
[Guest]: slowly growing up, I had this idea of
[Guest]: getting back to literature because I had always really loved
[Guest]: writing. So I wrote a
[Guest]: manuscript, which was
[Guest]: on mythology. And I
[Guest]: approached a publisher who was at that time more
[Guest]: interested in writing history. So though he liked
[Guest]: my writing a lot, he
[Guest]: suggested that I write a book on history.
[Guest]: And that is completely
[Guest]: how it happened, completely accidentally.
[Guest]: And I found out that it was something that
[Guest]: I enjoyed doing. And strangely
[Guest]: enough, it's something in which I can use
[Guest]: both my skills, my scientific
[Guest]: background, because it requires a lot of research,
[Guest]: being extremely thorough
[Guest]: with things like sources and understanding
[Guest]: primary material, and as well
[Guest]: as my writing skills and, you know,
[Guest]: my fondness for literature. So the
[Guest]: writing of history or narrative history became
[Guest]: something that I was very
[Guest]: lucky enough to find that I could
[Guest]: combine the skills that I had and do
[Guest]: something which was so amazingly
[Amit Varma]: rewarding for me. And did you also read history
[Amit Varma]: at this time? At the time of
[Amit Varma]: starting to write, do you mean? Yeah, I mean,
[Guest]: did you read history for leisure also? I
[Guest]: wasn't reading history for
[Guest]: leisure per se before I started
[Guest]: writing about it, though I was
[Guest]: reading around it. You know,
[Guest]: I suppose what happened
[Guest]: is that as you, you know,
[Guest]: grow up in life, as you go through various
[Guest]: changes and various phases
[Guest]: of your life, you get interested in various
[Guest]: things. So, you know, initially
[Guest]: perhaps I would view things
[Guest]: as a young woman, and then as a young
[Guest]: woman out in the world, and then maybe
[Guest]: as a young Asian woman, you know.
[Guest]: And then things change, and I saw things
[Guest]: as a parent, and then as a parent of
[Guest]: young girls. And so at each
[Guest]: stage of my life, I was interested in different
[Guest]: readings. And so one of the things
[Guest]: that I started to get interested in, before history
[Guest]: even, was the way in
[Guest]: which we have been colonized in
[Guest]: our imagination, in the way we view the
[Guest]: world, in our memories even,
[Guest]: you know, to the extent where many of
[Guest]: my memories, like the way I grew up reading
[Guest]: things like Enid Blyton,
[Guest]: my memories and my nostalgia were
[Guest]: for things that I had no physical
[Guest]: experience of. So whether it was
[Guest]: for soft summer sunshine, or cucumber
[Guest]: sandwiches, or Wordsworth's
[Guest]: poetry, which I could quote, but I couldn't
[Guest]: quote Mir or Ghalib, you know.
[Guest]: So these were things that started
[Guest]: bothering me, and things that I started thinking
[Guest]: about. You know, I read Pankaj Mishra,
[Guest]: Roy Moxton,
[Guest]: The Theft of India, various things around these
[Guest]: issues. And that was something
[Guest]: which was in my background as I
[Guest]: started to think about writing
[Amit Varma]: about history. And who
[Amit Varma]: are the sort of thinkers who
[Amit Varma]: have been a big influence on you? Like one question
[Amit Varma]: I sometimes ask my guests is
[Amit Varma]: if they can name books which change the way
[Amit Varma]: they look at the world. And not necessarily specific
[Amit Varma]: books, but even thinkers, or
[Guest]: you know. Well, I would say
[Guest]: there has been a three-fold
[Guest]: sort of influence on me. So on
[Guest]: the one hand, there are
[Guest]: as I was saying, the writers who have pointed
[Guest]: out the
[Guest]: colonization of our history.
[Guest]: So people like Pankaj Mishra and many others, you know,
[Guest]: even Naipaul, the way he talks about identity,
[Guest]: and the way he talks about Indianness
[Guest]: outside India,
[Guest]: rootlessness. These are all things, people who
[Guest]: have had an influence on me.
[Guest]: And then the second sort of phase
[Guest]: of influence has been the women
[Guest]: writers, the women who talk about gender.
[Guest]: So whether it's Ira Vethikarve
[Guest]: and Uganta, you know, I found her
[Guest]: essays startling about the way in which she
[Guest]: writes about women of the Mahabharata.
[Guest]: And one writer who has
[Guest]: been extremely influential for
[Guest]: me has been Dr. Rubilal,
[Guest]: who is, she defines herself as a
[Guest]: feminist historian. She's a
[Guest]: professor and a writer of history. She's written
[Guest]: about Noor Jahan, but her
[Guest]: most groundbreaking book was about
[Guest]: the early Mughal harem,
[Guest]: domesticity and power.
[Guest]: And so she, for the first time I came across
[Guest]: a woman scholar who was
[Guest]: writing about the way in which
[Guest]: the harem existed
[Guest]: in a completely different way in which
[Guest]: I had thought about it. So her
[Guest]: writing for me was extremely important.
[Guest]: I have based a lot of my writing on
[Guest]: what she has already discovered.
[Guest]: And there's also
[Guest]: people like Chimamanda Adichie,
[Guest]: at a different level, the way she talks about
[Guest]: the importance of a single
[Guest]: narrative, how that can be so harmful
[Guest]: for us if we see the world
[Guest]: and our past and our present
[Guest]: through only one filter.
[Guest]: So these are some of the people. And then
[Guest]: the very third and last aspect, which
[Guest]: was useful for me, is stylistic.
[Guest]: Now we often don't talk about that
[Guest]: very much because I suppose writing of
[Guest]: history, the material itself is so
[Guest]: interesting that people mostly ask
[Guest]: me about the material itself, but stylistically
[Guest]: speaking, people who have been influential
[Guest]: are people like Hilary Mantel, even though she writes
[Guest]: fiction, fictionalized
[Guest]: history, but still, her style is
[Guest]: so arresting that when I read Wolf Hall
[Guest]: and her trilogy, I thought
[Guest]: this is the way I want to write history for
[Guest]: India as well. I want people to
[Guest]: feel like they have been caught by the scruff
[Guest]: of the neck and thrown into that century,
[Guest]: whichever century I'm writing about, and to
[Guest]: feel the reality of it, the geographical
[Guest]: reality, the noises, the smells, everything
[Guest]: in three dimensions. So these
[Guest]: are some of the influences that have
[Amit Varma]: shaped my writing. And one of the things
[Amit Varma]: I've sort of realized in the last few years,
[Amit Varma]: thanks partly to writers like you, is that
[Amit Varma]: so much of history
[Amit Varma]: has been captive to and
[Amit Varma]: colonized by the male gaze,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, the history of humanity
[Amit Varma]: has been treated as a history of men who are
[Amit Varma]: going out and doing big things,
[Amit Varma]: invading kingdoms and they're
[Amit Varma]: setting up dynasties and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: and also they've been looked at,
[Amit Varma]: most of this history has been
[Amit Varma]: written by male historians, and that's
[Amit Varma]: the perspective you see, and the women are largely
[Amit Varma]: invisible. And is that something
[Amit Varma]: which sort of influenced,
[Amit Varma]: because you were already thinking
[Amit Varma]: about these issues, like you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: is that something that influenced
[Amit Varma]: what you chose your subject
[Guest]: to be when you actually started writing history?
[Guest]: Yes, yes, definitely. You know,
[Guest]: I read a
[Guest]: statistic which said that
[Guest]: 99.5% of the
[Guest]: written history that we see around us,
[Guest]: starting from 5000 BC
[Guest]: onwards, you know, whatever there is,
[Guest]: the sculptures, the writing,
[Guest]: the calligraphy, everything,
[Guest]: 99.5% deals with men,
[Guest]: and 0.5% tells the
[Guest]: stories of women. So that statistic
[Guest]: sort of stopped me in my tracks. It was a very
[Guest]: startling statistic. And when I
[Guest]: stopped to think about what I knew about women's
[Guest]: history, I think that's very true.
[Guest]: So it definitely,
[Guest]: starting from the fact that I have
[Guest]: two, as I said, two daughters,
[Guest]: I wanted them to see the
[Guest]: world around them in a less biased way,
[Guest]: that history need not
[Guest]: necessarily be about the fighting of
[Guest]: battles, about the conquest of territories,
[Guest]: and there are many, many other aspects
[Guest]: that form a civilization, maybe
[Guest]: so-called soft power, you know,
[Guest]: the music, the creation of music, the creation
[Guest]: of art, architecture, politics,
[Guest]: behind the scenes, who controls things,
[Guest]: sexual politics, these are all
[Guest]: things that contribute to a culture.
[Guest]: And very often, women are absolutely
[Guest]: instrumental in that aspect of it.
[Guest]: So for 100%, this was something that
[Guest]: I thought that whatever I write,
[Guest]: even if it's the history of a man, or
[Guest]: you know, whichever aspect I'm going to cover,
[Guest]: I'm going to bring in all the women involved,
[Guest]: because they really tend to be written out
[Guest]: of the stories of men,
[Guest]: and history ends up being the story of men told
[Amit Varma]: by men.
[Amit Varma]: And how difficult
[Amit Varma]: is it then to
[Amit Varma]: start researching into that kind of history, because
[Amit Varma]: most history is written by male historians
[Amit Varma]: who tend to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whitewash the women or recast them in
[Amit Varma]: acceptable ways, and so, I mean, this is
[Amit Varma]: really a dual question, in the sense
[Unknown]: as someone who's not a trained historian,
[Amit Varma]: how, what is it like to do
[Amit Varma]: history? How did you learn that?
[Amit Varma]: And also then going beyond that,
[Amit Varma]: what do you do about this essential limitation
[Amit Varma]: that you are broadening the gaze
[Amit Varma]: by which you're looking at history, but
[Guest]: the voices don't have that same gaze?
[Guest]: That's right. To answer the first part
[Guest]: of your question, I think
[Guest]: the way you can teach yourself history is go to
[Guest]: the primary sources, you know, that's the most
[Guest]: important aspect
[Guest]: of writing history.
[Guest]: And there is a lot of primary sources,
[Guest]: even, of course, much less
[Guest]: where women are concerned, so I always make an
[Guest]: effort to find the women's
[Guest]: voices. So, for example, in one of, in my first
[Guest]: book, I've written the story of
[Guest]: Amrapali, who was a Buddhist nun at the time
[Guest]: of the Buddha, 6th century BCE.
[Guest]: And you would think, okay, there's nothing
[Guest]: written about women in the 6th century BCE,
[Guest]: but luckily there is, because she lived
[Guest]: at the time of the Buddha, and
[Guest]: the Buddhist monks were one of the
[Guest]: first great writers
[Guest]: of history, you know, and they wrote everything
[Guest]: around the Buddha. And so we have the story
[Guest]: of the nuns, and their poems,
[Guest]: they wrote poetry, and very luckily for us,
[Guest]: we have the voice of this woman from 2000
[Guest]: years ago, even today.
[Guest]: Her story, her longings,
[Guest]: her desires, the way she talks
[Guest]: about the evanescence of her beauty,
[Guest]: how it has faded, and this is so poignant
[Guest]: to us even today. So, there are
[Guest]: ways women's voices are there,
[Guest]: it just takes a little bit more effort,
[Guest]: a little bit more diligence and searching
[Guest]: to get to them. Like, for example,
[Guest]: if we have Lakshmibai, the story
[Guest]: of Lakshmibai has been written by many different
[Guest]: men.
[Guest]: And you have the Europeans who are
[Guest]: writing about her, and they're writing from their point
[Guest]: of view, with their European gaze,
[Guest]: so they talk about her as being like an
[Guest]: Amazon, and immediately there as well,
[Guest]: there's a texturing of Rani Lakshmibai,
[Guest]: which is very different from when
[Guest]: a Brahmin writes about her,
[Guest]: and writes about her as this great
[Guest]: widow, this great, you know, almost
[Guest]: a holy woman, Mother India. So you have
[Guest]: Mother India on one side, the Amazon woman
[Guest]: on the other side. You see some men look
[Guest]: at the same, very same woman, in many
[Guest]: different ways. And then it is my
[Guest]: job to sort of see the intersection
[Guest]: of these many gazes, and to see
[Guest]: where does the humanity
[Guest]: of this woman lie. What made
[Guest]: her an Amazon? Her fearlessness,
[Guest]: her amazing bravery, yes.
[Guest]: What made her Mother India? The fact that
[Guest]: she adopted this child, but also
[Guest]: the fact that she nurtured her city.
[Guest]: And for me, that is the crux of this woman.
[Guest]: This nurturing aspect of her.
[Guest]: That she didn't want to die in battle.
[Guest]: We are always told, you know, Lakshmibai, Khob Ladi
[Guest]: Madani, you know, that is the line we remember.
[Guest]: But what makes her a heroine for me
[Guest]: is the fact that she wanted to live,
[Guest]: and she wanted her people to live,
[Guest]: and she fought very hard for her right
[Guest]: to rule her people, and for them to be
[Guest]: safe under her care. She eventually
[Guest]: lost, and she died in battle. But
[Guest]: these are the aspects of women's stories
[Guest]: that I want to bring up. Not necessarily the dying
[Guest]: in battle, which is, at the end of the
[Guest]: day, a very male way of showing heroism.
[Guest]: But there is a different way of being heroic,
[Guest]: and that is something that I wanted to
[Guest]: look at in my first book.
[Guest]: So those stories are
[Guest]: there, that literature is there.
[Guest]: It takes maybe a different gaze,
[Guest]: a different interpretation to get at it.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting things
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned in Heroines,
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk more about Daughters of the Sun today, but
[Amit Varma]: I found Heroines very interesting, and
[Amit Varma]: in fact, it actually reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of Yogantha, which is why I brought it up
[Amit Varma]: in our conversation earlier, and I mean that entirely
[Amit Varma]: as a compliment, because I think Yogantha is a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting things you said
[Amit Varma]: at the start of Heroines is
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: there is this sort of interplay
[Amit Varma]: between history and myth,
[Amit Varma]: and how a lot of women in history
[Amit Varma]: are recast in convenient
[Amit Varma]: ways that are palatable to men,
[Amit Varma]: like what you just described about
[Amit Varma]: Lakshmibai, and often they're almost sanitized
[Amit Varma]: and they're made to fit into these roles.
[Amit Varma]: And equally,
[Amit Varma]: how myths can also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the same sort of interplay works the
[Amit Varma]: other way, and I was very fascinated by
[Amit Varma]: the chapter on Draupadi in that,
[Amit Varma]: because what we find
[Amit Varma]: with many of our myths is
[Amit Varma]: that those myths are shaped
[Amit Varma]: to fit social norms. So you look at someone like
[Amit Varma]: Sita, she is the ideal Hindu
[Amit Varma]: woman in terms of being pativrata,
[Amit Varma]: being devoted to her husband,
[Amit Varma]: virtuous, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But Draupadi is like this
[Amit Varma]: incredibly feisty character who just
[Amit Varma]: goes against everything you would think
[Amit Varma]: of as, you know, the ideal Hindu
[Amit Varma]: nari. And
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why do you think Draupadi was even
[Guest]: conceived and imagined?
[Guest]: Draupadi is
[Guest]: one of my all-time favorite characters,
[Guest]: I have to say, because she's in a way the antithesis
[Guest]: of Sita, you know. What I love
[Guest]: about her is her fierce
[Guest]: erudition and her
[Guest]: outspokenness and her anger.
[Guest]: Now, you know, anger is something that we don't
[Guest]: see encouraged in Indian women. You know,
[Guest]: Indian women are encouraged to be quieter, to keep
[Guest]: their anger internalized. And in a way,
[Guest]: Sita, I feel, internalized her feelings,
[Guest]: her anger, and she combusts
[Guest]: in a way. You know, she dies, she commits suicide.
[Guest]: Draupadi doesn't do that.
[Guest]: She externalizes her anger.
[Guest]: In fact, she carries it on her own body
[Guest]: by keeping her hair loose for those 12 years
[Guest]: in exile, you know, and said,
[Guest]: I will not tie up my hair till it is drenched in blood,
[Guest]: in the blood of my enemy. So I find this
[Guest]: a very powerful thing that she
[Guest]: has said, which is why I start my book with Draupadi,
[Guest]: because I want today's women to remember
[Guest]: this for their daughters and
[Guest]: for themselves. You know, we call our daughters Sita,
[Guest]: we never call them Draupadi. Why is that?
[Guest]: You know, I really want to challenge that and say,
[Guest]: let's go back. So people have imagined
[Guest]: this woman all these thousands of years
[Guest]: ago. As you say, why did
[Guest]: this happen and how did it happen?
[Guest]: How did it happen that she was allowed to say these
[Guest]: things, right? She even challenges Yudhishthira
[Guest]: oftentimes. She calls him
[Guest]: less than a man, almost a eunuch for not
[Guest]: standing up for her, for not fighting for her.
[Guest]: She says some very damaging things
[Guest]: for, you know, as a queen to her husband.
[Guest]: But she's allowed to say this.
[Guest]: So what is it
[Guest]: in our time in the past
[Guest]: that women were given this voice, this agency,
[Guest]: and in fact, such a powerful
[Guest]: woman who is, they say, the cause of the
[Guest]: war itself and who brings about, you know,
[Guest]: the end of that era. What is
[Guest]: it that allowed this woman to be the way
[Guest]: she is, that society accepted
[Guest]: her and loved her in her own time
[Guest]: as this woman? But if you, you know,
[Guest]: when I explain it in my chapter, through the years,
[Guest]: through the centuries, she has been sanitized
[Guest]: progressively.
[Guest]: So that in the end, finally, she is almost
[Guest]: a Sita-like character. If you look at,
[Guest]: you know, the actors who are playing her today on
[Guest]: television, they are the same
[Guest]: fair-skinned, you know,
[Guest]: patirat women, clearly
[Guest]: upper-caste, brahminical, you know,
[Guest]: part of the patriarchy, very much in,
[Guest]: you know, part of the system.
[Guest]: So why has that happened? Why are we
[Guest]: today almost more regressive
[Guest]: and having to make our women conform
[Guest]: to certain standards, to
[Guest]: shut down their anger, to stamp
[Guest]: down their voices? What is it that in us
[Guest]: as a society, that so many thousands
[Guest]: of years ago, this woman was allowed
[Guest]: to be angry, to be fierce
[Guest]: and to question the men in her life,
[Guest]: whereas today, she has been sanitized
[Guest]: to such an extent that she is almost
[Guest]: indistinguishable. So often when I
[Guest]: talk about heroines, I show a slide
[Guest]: which shows the eight women
[Guest]: as they are portrayed in popular culture today
[Guest]: and there's hardly any difference between them.
[Guest]: They're all the same, very fair-skinned
[Guest]: with their, you know, full jewellery.
[Guest]: And the jewellery is a symbol in Indian society
[Guest]: of marriage status, which means that your sexuality
[Guest]: is allowed only within
[Guest]: this sanctified arena of marriage.
[Guest]: You know, and the aim is to procreate,
[Guest]: to have children. Why is it
[Guest]: that all these women must
[Guest]: conform to this standard, whereas earlier
[Guest]: on in their own times, whether it's 2000 years
[Guest]: ago, 500 years ago, you know, Mirabai,
[Guest]: etc., they were allowed to have
[Guest]: agency, they were allowed to have
[Guest]: freedom of expression. Mirabai too
[Guest]: said some very shocking things. If we look
[Guest]: at her padas today, she says
[Guest]: things like, this
[Guest]: habit that we have, I'm just paraphrasing,
[Guest]: but this habit that we have of sending
[Guest]: young women away to get
[Guest]: married and severe all connection
[Guest]: with their natal homes, so that there's
[Guest]: no support structure for them. She questions
[Guest]: this. She says, why do we do this? Why do
[Guest]: we send young girls so far away?
[Guest]: Why are they abused by their in-laws? Why do
[Guest]: we allow this to happen? These are such
[Guest]: powerful things for women to say.
[Guest]: And yet, with time, what happened
[Guest]: to Mirabai was, it was, slowly
[Guest]: her story was altered, so that she
[Guest]: became this married woman who
[Guest]: waited conveniently and
[Guest]: quietly, submissively for her husband to die.
[Guest]: Then once he died, she stepped
[Guest]: out of the house as a good widow, and
[Guest]: she was allowed to go and sing her songs. Whereas
[Guest]: that is probably not what happened. She probably
[Guest]: left home because she was fed up of being
[Guest]: abused by her in-laws and by her husband.
[Guest]: She left her husband as a married
[Guest]: woman, and as a single married woman
[Guest]: she was alone on the roads,
[Guest]: accompanied by other singers, other devotees,
[Guest]: by men and women. So she was
[Guest]: in a sexually vulnerable position.
[Guest]: And yet, she went out and she sang
[Guest]: these amazing songs, which
[Guest]: I think, the single most
[Guest]: recognizable
[Guest]: figure, maybe the female figure, is Mirabai.
[Guest]: Everybody knows her songs. So she
[Guest]: tapped into a certain longing in
[Guest]: people, unlike anybody else
[Guest]: before, you know. But yet
[Guest]: today, all these 100-500 years later,
[Guest]: we have made her into this very
[Guest]: sanitized figure. And if you ask Rajput ladies
[Guest]: today, they will say, yes, Mirabai is a wonderful
[Guest]: heroine, but we will not encourage
[Guest]: her behavior in our daughters. Again,
[Guest]: this difference between what we will
[Guest]: allow our daughters today, and
[Guest]: what the figures have stood for in the past.
[Guest]: So this is something that I want people to
[Guest]: think about, that why is it? Why has
[Guest]: that happened? And what can we do?
[Guest]: Can we look back upon these women as
[Guest]: heroic figures for daughters today?
[Guest]: For young women in India today?
[Guest]: You know, let us challenge this
[Guest]: very fair
[Guest]: and sanitized vision that we are being
[Guest]: offered time and again, and it sort of force-fed
[Guest]: these women's images. Let us challenge that
[Guest]: and look back to what we have in our
[Guest]: culture. Sometimes I'm told, oh,
[Guest]: feminism is a Western construct.
[Guest]: It is not. We have had women who are
[Guest]: fiercely feminists, you know, from Gargi
[Guest]: onwards, who have spoken their mind.
[Guest]: So our society has accepted
[Guest]: and fostered this spirit. Why has it
[Guest]: gone? So these are some of the thoughts that I
[Guest]: want people to have and to think about.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great insight. In fact, I have a
[Amit Varma]: couple of digressions, and you know, what you said
[Amit Varma]: about what Mirabai said, that why are women
[Amit Varma]: sent away to their husbands without anything, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of a recent episode
[Amit Varma]: I did with the economic
[Unknown]: historian Chinmay Tumbe, who wrote a book
[Unknown]: called India Moving on Migration.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points he made, and to my
[Amit Varma]: shame, this point had never struck me,
[Amit Varma]: is that a very large
[Amit Varma]: part of migration is simply
[Amit Varma]: women getting married and going.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't think of that. We think of migration as men
[Amit Varma]: going, or families going, or whatever, but
[Guest]: so much of migration is women getting married and going.
[Amit Varma]: That's right, yes. And the other thought
[Amit Varma]: that sort of struck me was, I'd also done an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Tony Joseph, who's written a book
[Amit Varma]: Early Indians, and one of the points he made
[Amit Varma]: in that was that they were, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a couple of millennia ago, you had
[Amit Varma]: competing strands within Hinduism,
[Amit Varma]: and they were different, and they were competing,
[Amit Varma]: and not all of them
[Amit Varma]: were this particular fixed strand
[Amit Varma]: which looks at a woman in a particular way
[Amit Varma]: like we look at Sita today.
[Amit Varma]: And it just so happens that one of those
[Amit Varma]: strands kind of won out, and it was a
[Amit Varma]: political victory, and that strand then dominated
[Amit Varma]: our culture, and all of these women
[Amit Varma]: and now this is me speaking,
[Amit Varma]: sort of got, you know, recast
[Amit Varma]: into it. But the fact
[Guest]: is that these strands were there. Yes.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And
[Guest]: to come to your first point,
[Guest]: this whole point
[Guest]: about the alienation of women from their natal
[Guest]: homes, it's something which we have exoticized
[Guest]: and wrongly so. You know, this
[Guest]: whole bidai genre which has come up,
[Guest]: which talks about the saying
[Guest]: goodbye to the bride,
[Guest]: it's a terrible thing. We, you know, we must
[Guest]: not exoticize it. It is a terrible thing to cut
[Guest]: off a young woman from her
[Guest]: family, from her mother, from her
[Guest]: natal family, from the support of her brothers, her sisters,
[Guest]: everything she has known. She's thrown
[Guest]: into a new place where she's automatically
[Guest]: a second citizen because she doesn't know anything
[Guest]: about that new household.
[Guest]: So this is something that
[Guest]: has been, you know, very much praised
[Guest]: in folk literature,
[Guest]: and Mirabai challenges that, and so it is
[Guest]: something very refreshing. When I read that, I said,
[Guest]: yes, this is something, today I can
[Guest]: absolutely understand what she's saying
[Guest]: and I would say the same thing for my daughters. I would
[Guest]: not want them to be cut off from their families,
[Guest]: you know. So this is an
[Guest]: interesting point that women were always,
[Guest]: endogamy has been practiced for so long,
[Guest]: sending women upwards and onwards and
[Guest]: away from their family, which was in effect
[Guest]: in a way almost castrating them
[Guest]: because then they have no power to fall back on, right?
[Guest]: So they have to do what they must do in their
[Guest]: in-laws' family. And
[Guest]: the second point about them, there have been many
[Guest]: different strands, and it is a point that I make
[Guest]: as well, is that there are very
[Guest]: many different ways of being
[Guest]: feminine, of being a woman, and being a
[Guest]: heroic woman in India. What does it mean to be
[Guest]: a heroic woman, right? There are many
[Guest]: many different ways of doing that, and
[Guest]: every woman in the book that I have written
[Guest]: does it in a different way, whether it is
[Guest]: through her music, whether it is
[Guest]: in a more manly way, in quotes,
[Guest]: on the battlefield, whether it is
[Guest]: you know, leading men
[Guest]: in battle, or whether it is just
[Guest]: shaping society around her
[Guest]: in whatever way she can. These
[Guest]: are all heroic ways, and these were
[Guest]: very accepted ways, and there was no one
[Guest]: single way. When I came across these, you know,
[Guest]: the writings on these women, they were never
[Guest]: criticized and told, it would be better
[Guest]: for you to be this other way, you know,
[Guest]: rather than being the way you are. They were allowed to be
[Guest]: that different way, and it is only in more recent
[Guest]: times, I think, that we have
[Guest]: drawn these strictures around these women and
[Amit Varma]: wanted them to be a certain way.
[Amit Varma]: And what both your books also demonstrate is that
[Amit Varma]: that heroism is something that you
[Amit Varma]: have to look in the context of each individual
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, what are the restraints
[Amit Varma]: on them and so on. And we often
[Amit Varma]: tend to think of heroism as
[Amit Varma]: just marching out to battle holding a sword,
[Amit Varma]: which is why, you know, the point you made earlier about Lakshmi Bai
[Unknown]: and, you know, that's a typical
[Amit Varma]: image of her, and heroism
[Amit Varma]: amounts to a lot more than that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to your second book now,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, where did, given
[Amit Varma]: that everything that I had read
[Amit Varma]: of Mughal history before this,
[Amit Varma]: most of it was centered around these men
[Amit Varma]: and there was this notion that women
[Amit Varma]: are just, you know, stuck in their imperial
[Amit Varma]: harems or desirannas or whatever and they're not important
[Amit Varma]: characters. What brought you
[Amit Varma]: to the notion of writing this book? When did you
[Amit Varma]: realize that this material is really
[Guest]: rich and someone needs to tell this story?
[Guest]: I think it was, you know, when I wrote Heroines,
[Guest]: one of the heroines that I write about
[Guest]: is Jahanara Begum.
[Guest]: And it was when I found out how much
[Guest]: she had done, you know, and her accomplishments,
[Guest]: it was a very visceral
[Guest]: and personal reaction that I had
[Guest]: because I'm a Delhi woman, I was brought up in Delhi.
[Guest]: Jahanara is a Delhi woman
[Guest]: to the extent that she has created great
[Guest]: extents of old Delhi, and yet
[Guest]: growing up, I was never taught about her.
[Guest]: So I had this sort of visceral
[Guest]: reaction to this, a sort of anger
[Guest]: and a sort of, you know,
[Guest]: feeling that enough is enough
[Guest]: and what lies
[Guest]: behind all these stories that we have not been
[Guest]: told? So there was this questioning
[Guest]: of the given sort of history
[Guest]: that had been taught, Mughal history,
[Guest]: in very bullet form, you know, in a very dry
[Guest]: way, and about the men, because they have
[Guest]: been amazing Mughal men, definitely.
[Guest]: But where are the women
[Guest]: and why were they written out of the stories?
[Guest]: Was there possibly more to them?
[Guest]: And that was when I started researching them
[Guest]: and I found Ruby Lal's book, and where I
[Guest]: realized that the very idea of the harem,
[Guest]: which to my mind, like to yours,
[Guest]: was something very exotic, was
[Guest]: actually something that we had inherited from the
[Guest]: European gaze, because in parallel
[Guest]: there was the, the Europeans were coming
[Guest]: to India at the same time, and they wrote extensively
[Guest]: about the Mughals, because they were fascinated
[Guest]: by this culture. So we
[Guest]: have all this writing about the Mughals and the
[Guest]: harem, and they were fascinated by the
[Guest]: harem because they had no access to it.
[Guest]: And yet they could sense that the women in the
[Guest]: harem had power, they had money,
[Guest]: and they had influence. So it fascinated
[Guest]: them and horrified them in equal measure,
[Guest]: because at the same time in Europe,
[Guest]: Victorian Europe, and before that,
[Guest]: women had no power, they were not allowed
[Guest]: to control their own money. They were meant
[Guest]: to be rather, you know, quiet and
[Guest]: hold their opinions to themselves.
[Guest]: So this was something very contrary to what the
[Guest]: men had experienced in their own country. So they
[Guest]: came here with this mixture of abhorrence
[Guest]: and excitement. And they created
[Guest]: this fantasy world of the harem.
[Guest]: And it is a fantasy because
[Guest]: they had no access to this harem.
[Guest]: Nor were they physically allowed
[Guest]: to enter that space, nor could they speak
[Guest]: the language. So there were many layers of
[Guest]: obstruction between them and these Mughal women,
[Guest]: but that did not stop them from fantasizing,
[Guest]: from listening to bazaar gossip,
[Guest]: from gleaning bits and pieces of information,
[Guest]: and bringing out these
[Guest]: novels and novellas of exotic
[Guest]: life, which became
[Guest]: extremely popular back home
[Guest]: in Europe, and which in a way
[Guest]: then percolated down to us
[Guest]: till today, where we sort of have in the
[Guest]: back of our mind this idea that
[Guest]: women in a Mughal harem, all they did
[Guest]: was one woman was there in the middle of
[Guest]: the room waiting for the Pacha all day,
[Guest]: she's trying to attract his attention,
[Guest]: she's gossiping and bitching about her other co-wives,
[Guest]: and her whole life is
[Guest]: spent in this decadence of
[Guest]: beautifying herself and waiting
[Guest]: for the sexual favors of
[Guest]: the Pacha. And this
[Guest]: is an entirely false view,
[Guest]: which we can see from Rubi Lal's work
[Guest]: and from the other readings that I've done around it.
[Guest]: And the Mughal harem, as I've
[Guest]: written in my book, was a place of
[Guest]: in fact, it was a place of great solidarity
[Guest]: amongst women. Most of the
[Guest]: women in a harem were not sexually available
[Guest]: to the Pacha at all. It was
[Guest]: a huge space, with
[Guest]: people like the Pacha's sisters,
[Guest]: his unmarried cousins, his aunts,
[Guest]: his grandmothers, his
[Guest]: foster mothers, milk mothers, his milk sisters,
[Guest]: there were so many people, there were
[Guest]: visitors, and then there was all the
[Guest]: retinue around these individual women.
[Guest]: His wives brought their retinues with them, so
[Guest]: when they came in from a different place, they brought their own
[Guest]: cooks, they brought their masseuses, they brought their
[Guest]: priests, they brought so many other women,
[Guest]: none of whom were sexually available
[Guest]: to the Pacha. So this idea
[Guest]: of all these women being sexually available
[Guest]: is something completely false.
[Guest]: And on the other hand, these women had
[Guest]: productive, interesting lives,
[Guest]: they earned a salary,
[Guest]: they had jobs, fixed jobs, for which they
[Guest]: had a salary. So they were
[Guest]: carrying out a function. And the
[Guest]: ones at the top, obviously, had
[Guest]: an enormous amount of money as
[Guest]: the Mughal empire grew richer,
[Guest]: the individual women grew richer as well.
[Guest]: And it's very interesting because
[Guest]: if you look at the way the men write about
[Guest]: it, like the way I was telling you, the Jesuit
[Guest]: missionaries, for example, they had
[Guest]: only one idea, which was to proselytize
[Guest]: and to convert. So obviously for them
[Guest]: all these women were just in the
[Guest]: way of the Pacha and trying to lure him into
[Guest]: temptation, and they write about them like that.
[Guest]: On the other hand, if you look at
[Guest]: the writings of women, there are some women who have written
[Guest]: about the harem, and they write about it
[Guest]: very differently. For example,
[Guest]: if you look at Lady Molly Montague,
[Guest]: she was the wife of the ambassador to
[Guest]: the Ottomans in Turkey
[Guest]: in the 18th century.
[Guest]: And she writes about them
[Guest]: and she says, you know, she had access to the
[Guest]: harem, obviously, as being a woman, and she
[Guest]: goes with them to their baths.
[Guest]: And she writes about this incident in
[Guest]: which she is taken to the baths and the women want
[Guest]: to help her remove her clothes.
[Guest]: So they remove her clothes and then
[Guest]: all those Turkish ladies step back in horror
[Guest]: and they gasp and they say, what are you
[Guest]: wearing? Because she was wearing stays.
[Guest]: You know, those are made out of whale bones and they were
[Guest]: made to keep women's waist very tiny
[Guest]: and narrow so that you could barely breathe.
[Guest]: And they told her, you tell us that
[Guest]: our husbands are cruel with us, but look how
[Guest]: cruel your husband is with you and making you
[Guest]: wear these horrible clothes where you cannot even
[Guest]: move and breathe. So it's a very
[Guest]: interesting, you know, view we
[Guest]: have into this harem of how
[Guest]: the other women were viewing her and
[Guest]: how she was viewing those other women, you know.
[Guest]: So she had come with her
[Guest]: preconception that these women are all debased and
[Guest]: they're degraded and she writes saying actually
[Guest]: no, they have this freedom, they don't
[Guest]: have to wear stays like I do.
[Guest]: They have money. She says, who in England
[Guest]: controls, which woman controls her own
[Guest]: money? They don't. When they get married
[Guest]: they hand over their money to their husband. So she
[Guest]: was amazed that these women,
[Guest]: Muslim women, were able to control,
[Guest]: they were financially independent, which was a huge
[Guest]: thing. She writes about this to her friends.
[Guest]: So there are these many ways
[Guest]: where the voices of the women
[Guest]: writing about the harem completely
[Guest]: contradicts the voices of the men.
[Guest]: And so when you put the two together
[Guest]: you get a very different picture
[Guest]: of the harem and how it really was.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, reading about the harems, it just kind
[Amit Varma]: of struck me that, my God,
[Amit Varma]: not only is it not the simplistic
[Amit Varma]: notion of a harem that I had in my head,
[Amit Varma]: but the term that
[Amit Varma]: struck me was political economy. It's so deeply
[Amit Varma]: complex, you know, they have
[Amit Varma]: money, they have power, they have
[Amit Varma]: webs of influence and
[Amit Varma]: it's a question that I
[Amit Varma]: often ask the historians on my show
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask a more
[Amit Varma]: elongated version of it to you.
[Amit Varma]: The question I ask is that
[Amit Varma]: given that we tend to suffer
[Unknown]: from the hindsight bias, because
[Amit Varma]: everything that has happened seems inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, how do we
[Amit Varma]: remove our knowledge of what has already
[Amit Varma]: happened to look at a specific event
[Amit Varma]: at a current time in a fresh way?
[Amit Varma]: And the question is even more
[Amit Varma]: complicated for someone like you who's writing about
[Amit Varma]: this period, being that
[Amit Varma]: one also has all those
[Amit Varma]: prior impressions and biases
[Amit Varma]: that have come from firstly the European
[Amit Varma]: gaze which you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: and also even the male local
[Amit Varma]: gaze, like you've mentioned that Abu Fazal
[Amit Varma]: for example, wrote very
[Amit Varma]: very differently about the same
[Unknown]: emperor and the same happenings and someone like
[Unknown]: Gulbadan did, who is bringing
[Amit Varma]: in all those nuances and the rounded picture.
[Amit Varma]: So mentally, did you have to
[Amit Varma]: take that step back and recast
[Guest]: everything and look, how do you do that?
[Guest]: Yes, that's an interesting point
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I think the only way
[Guest]: to do that is
[Guest]: like you said for Abu al-Fazal
[Guest]: Abu al-Fazal in a way
[Guest]: does as much harm to the
[Guest]: women as the Europeans do
[Guest]: because even though his idea and
[Guest]: his motivation was very different. He wanted
[Guest]: to create in Akbar the semi-divine
[Guest]: king, you know, who was above
[Guest]: all reproach and so his women
[Guest]: had to be also above all reproach
[Guest]: and therefore they had to be completely chased
[Guest]: and to be completely chased you had to
[Guest]: be completely hidden. So he hides them
[Guest]: away in this elaborate
[Guest]: framework and he says they are all, he gives
[Guest]: them titles and they are all chased, whether they are
[Guest]: newborn babies or whether they are
[Guest]: old ladies, everybody is the same, they
[Guest]: are all chased, you know, and they have
[Guest]: no individuality, they are completely hidden. So
[Guest]: in a way he does as much disservice
[Guest]: to us today trying
[Guest]: to find out about women as the European
[Guest]: men did. But luckily
[Guest]: as always happens in history
[Guest]: you know, you cannot control things no matter
[Guest]: how hard or how much money you have at your disposal
[Guest]: and luckily for us there is somebody like Badawni
[Guest]: who wrote an illicit biography
[Guest]: of Akbar who was very critical, who
[Guest]: was an extremely erudite and learned
[Guest]: man himself but he was just critical of
[Guest]: Akbar's religious policies, that's
[Guest]: the only thing he held against Akbar and
[Guest]: so he wrote this illicit biography of
[Guest]: Akbar and through his words
[Guest]: inadvertently we find out
[Guest]: so much about the women because he blames
[Guest]: the Hindu wives of Akbar
[Guest]: for all these terrible changes that
[Guest]: he is seeing in his beloved Muslim Padshah
[Guest]: and he says, you know, Akbar is like this
[Guest]: today, he is worshipping the sun,
[Guest]: he is wearing a tilak, he is wearing a rakhi
[Guest]: these terrible customs, he has
[Guest]: brought dogs into the place, you know
[Guest]: he is horrified and he clearly says
[Guest]: it is because from his early
[Guest]: age he has been in the company
[Guest]: of lousy Hindus, Brahmins
[Guest]: and Hindu women, his wives.
[Guest]: So we have here in black and white
[Guest]: and writing, we see the influence
[Guest]: of people like Harkabai, the Rajput
[Guest]: woman that Akbar married, so
[Guest]: it is very interesting for me because
[Guest]: I am setting out to find this connection
[Guest]: now perhaps if somebody had not set out
[Guest]: to look for this, you would just slip over it
[Guest]: and you would be like, okay, there is nothing on the women
[Guest]: but because I am always looking
[Guest]: out for any reference which
[Guest]: ties in the women to influence, which
[Guest]: ties in the women to the way the men
[Guest]: thought and what the men did, so
[Guest]: that is how I am able to pick out these things
[Guest]: I think because I am looking at it
[Guest]: in a way from my own filter.
[Guest]: So then I have Badawni, then I have Gulbadan
[Guest]: luckily, as you know I was telling you
[Guest]: earlier, we could so easily have
[Guest]: lost Gulbadan's voice because Akbar
[Guest]: when he was, when the empire was
[Guest]: finally settled and he said okay now
[Guest]: I must create a history for myself
[Guest]: because that was how Mughal emperors
[Guest]: you know sort of created legitimacy
[Guest]: for themselves. He asked Abul Fazal
[Guest]: to write a biography but wonderfully
[Guest]: for us he also asked the people who
[Guest]: had first hand knowledge of Humayun
[Guest]: and Babur to write about their memories
[Guest]: so he asked Johar, the
[Guest]: water carrier for Humayun
[Guest]: he asked other people and he asked his aunt
[Guest]: for whom he had a great deal of respect
[Amit Varma]: and Gulbadan wrote her wonderful biography
[Amit Varma]: and she is of course Babur's daughter, Humayun's sister
[Amit Varma]: that's right, Humayun's sister
[Guest]: she has experience, she came to India
[Guest]: at the age of six with Babur
[Guest]: then Babur died, she was with
[Guest]: Humayun through all his travails
[Guest]: you know when he was thrown out of India
[Guest]: by Sikandar Lodi, she was with him
[Guest]: in Kabul for all those years, she was
[Guest]: with him back when he came to India, she was
[Guest]: here when he finally died, she was in
[Guest]: India when Akbar became Padshah and then
[Guest]: for the rest of her very long life
[Guest]: she saw Akbar become a king
[Guest]: establish himself and establish the Mughal Empire
[Guest]: so an extraordinary woman who lived through
[Guest]: three different Padshahs
[Guest]: so we have her wonderful first hand account
[Guest]: of what all this
[Guest]: peripatetic journeying, what this
[Guest]: adventure, what this adventure
[Guest]: of forming the Mughal Empire
[Guest]: in India with these timid people
[Guest]: what it was like, we have through her eyes
[Guest]: and we could easily have lost that
[Guest]: because there was one copy of it
[Guest]: only one copy made, yes, 500
[Guest]: years ago and immediately
[Guest]: after she had written it, it was lost
[Guest]: nobody referred to it,
[Guest]: nobody else, no further biographer
[Guest]: later in time ever referred to this
[Guest]: book so it disappeared from even our
[Guest]: memory, then sometime in the 19th
[Guest]: century, an Englishman with the
[Guest]: East India Company was buying up
[Guest]: manuscripts like you do in the local kabaddi
[Guest]: bazaar, you go and you buy whatever old objects
[Guest]: you like, so he had a collection of a thousand
[Guest]: manuscripts, some worthless, some
[Guest]: interesting, when he died his widow
[Guest]: went back to England and she had all
[Guest]: these manuscripts, she needed to raise money, she was a
[Guest]: widow, she sold them to the British Library
[Guest]: the British Library early in
[Guest]: the 20th century had some of these
[Guest]: translated into English by Beveridge
[Guest]: and she discovered that one
[Guest]: of these manuscripts was actually the
[Guest]: biography of Barber's daughter
[Guest]: herself, Gulbadan's biography, so that's
[Guest]: how 500 years later it came
[Guest]: back into India, into our public
[Guest]: consciousness and we realized that we have
[Guest]: this first hand account, but
[Guest]: so you see, it takes a little bit of putting
[Guest]: all these stories together
[Guest]: to get an idea of what I want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: which is what the women were up to
[Amit Varma]: And while there's sheer luck, it also strikes me that there must be
[Guest]: so much else that is lost
[Guest]: Exactly, I think, and this is only half
[Guest]: of the book, Gulbadan's biography
[Guest]: was broken into two, torn into two pieces
[Guest]: and we only have the first section
[Guest]: so I'm always thinking, wow, who knows
[Guest]: in which Kabadi Bazaar, there may be the second section
[Guest]: somewhere lying around, the second half
[Guest]: of Humayun's life and that's still
[Guest]: undiscovered, maybe it's there somewhere, who knows
[Amit Varma]: Maybe one of the listeners of this show
[Guest]: will go to the nearest Kabadi Bazaar and find it
[Amit Varma]: I hope so! Make an attempt
[Amit Varma]: please tag us if you do find it
[Amit Varma]: Let's
[Amit Varma]: look now at the start
[Amit Varma]: of your book, Daughters of the Sun, and the start
[Amit Varma]: of the Mughal dynasty
[Amit Varma]: itself, though of course as you point out that
[Amit Varma]: Babur would have been very upset
[Unknown]: that it was called the Mughal dynasty
[Amit Varma]: Yes
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously it's a hug back to the Mongol
[Amit Varma]: part of his legacy and he was more proud
[Unknown]: of the Timurid side of it
[Amit Varma]: And you'd spoken earlier about, you know
[Amit Varma]: peripatetic early Mughals
[Amit Varma]: but what really struck me was that it's not
[Amit Varma]: just the men
[Amit Varma]: who are peripatetic, wherever they go
[Amit Varma]: you know this Haraman
[Unknown]: is that the correct pronunciation? Yes, yes
[Unknown]: Wherever they go, this Haraman is travelling with them
[Amit Varma]: which is this retinue of women
[Amit Varma]: and these are not retinue of necessarily
[Guest]: wives or mistresses or whatever
[Guest]: these are aunts, grandmothers
[Amit Varma]: these are serious people who are making
[Amit Varma]: serious decisions
[Amit Varma]: and one of the really interesting characters
[Amit Varma]: his father of course died when he was 13
[Amit Varma]: I think, right? That's right
[Amit Varma]: And you point out about how a lot of his
[Amit Varma]: guidance in terms of politics
[Amit Varma]: strategy and all that came from his grandmother
[Amit Varma]: Ehsan Daulat Begum
[Amit Varma]: and she also has a very interesting story
[Guest]: from her youth which reveals a lot of character
[Guest]: Yes, there's just one episode
[Guest]: that describes her
[Guest]: Babur is very scathing when he writes
[Guest]: about his own father, you know, he writes about how
[Guest]: he drank too much and he was overweight because of
[Guest]: that, you know, so he writes with a pretty
[Guest]: jaundiced view about his father
[Guest]: but never about the women in his life
[Guest]: he writes only with respect and love about the women
[Guest]: in his life, whether it is his mother, his
[Guest]: grandmother, his elder sister Khanzada
[Guest]: these three women who were extremely
[Guest]: influential in his life and he writes about
[Guest]: Ehsan Daulat Begum that at one
[Guest]: point when she was a much younger woman
[Guest]: she was travelling with her husband and at
[Guest]: some point in some conflict
[Guest]: she was captured by a chieftain
[Guest]: and the chieftain was very happy and he
[Guest]: said, I'm going to offer you to one of my
[Guest]: amirs and that is
[Guest]: your fate and so she is like, okay, she
[Guest]: pretends to be very happy with the decision and she
[Guest]: says, fine, no problem and she gets ready to
[Guest]: receive this amir at night
[Guest]: but actually what happens is that when the
[Guest]: amir enters her quarters, she has posted
[Guest]: her women around the door and
[Guest]: they pounce upon him, they catch him and they throw him
[Guest]: out of the window and he breaks his neck and he dies
[Guest]: and so the next morning the chieftain
[Guest]: comes to her and says, what have you done, how dare you, you know
[Guest]: and she says, I am already
[Guest]: married and I have a husband and if this is
[Guest]: the way you treat honourable women then do with me
[Guest]: as you will and the man is so
[Guest]: impressed that obviously he sends her
[Guest]: back to her husband with honour
[Guest]: and these are the sort of
[Guest]: you know, brave
[Guest]: resolute women that Babur
[Guest]: luckily has around him
[Guest]: to show them the way when he is only a 13
[Guest]: year old boy really, you know
[Guest]: trying to find his way in the world, surrounded
[Guest]: by his bloodthirsty uncles who would
[Guest]: kill him in an instant for the throne themselves
[Guest]: and it is because he has his mother and his
[Guest]: grandmother and Khanzada Begum around him
[Guest]: that he survives at all, you know, never mind
[Guest]: becomes the founder of the Mughal Empire
[Guest]: and he writes about this and he writes
[Guest]: eloquently about Khanzada
[Guest]: Begum, how much he owes to her because
[Guest]: when he is surrounded by Shabani Khan
[Guest]: Uzbek, who is his great foe
[Guest]: in Samarkand
[Guest]: Shabani Khan makes an offer
[Guest]: to Babur and he says
[Guest]: I will let you go, you can go with your
[Guest]: life and your small retinue but you leave
[Guest]: your sister with me and you know, leave her
[Guest]: as my captive and Babur is
[Guest]: forced to do that and it is a shameful thing
[Guest]: for him to do because it shows that he has
[Guest]: no power and he has to leave
[Guest]: Khanzada Begum but Khanzada Begum
[Guest]: herself is never blamed or any
[Guest]: way demeaned for having to become the
[Guest]: wife of an enemy. She lives there
[Guest]: for 10 years after Shabani Khan
[Guest]: Uzbek eventually divorces her because he gets
[Guest]: fed up of how much she keeps talking about her own
[Guest]: family which I find really
[Guest]: evocative and amazing which means even
[Guest]: in confinement, even as a prisoner
[Guest]: of the lord's enemy
[Guest]: she must have kept on
[Guest]: talking about Babur and the Timurids, you know
[Guest]: so he gets fed up of her and he
[Guest]: gives her to a more lowly person as that
[Guest]: person's wife. So you can imagine
[Guest]: how it must have been very
[Guest]: humiliating for Khanzada Begum but she never
[Guest]: loses her spirit and after 10 years
[Guest]: when Shabani Khan Uzbek is defeated
[Guest]: she is sent back to Babur
[Guest]: and Babur is delighted to have
[Guest]: her back and he makes her Patsha Begum
[Guest]: which is the most respected
[Guest]: woman of the harem
[Guest]: and all his descendants
[Guest]: equally respect her and
[Guest]: she is never in any way
[Guest]: maimed or made to feel guilty
[Guest]: for the fact that she was the wife of two other
[Guest]: men before she came to Babur's
[Guest]: court which I found so refreshing
[Guest]: when we think about her exact contemporaries
[Guest]: the Rajputs, you know who put
[Guest]: so much worth on a woman's sexual
[Guest]: chastity that they would prefer
[Guest]: them to commit sati and johar
[Guest]: at the time of facing an enemy
[Guest]: rather than you know to
[Guest]: take a chance on what might happen to their life
[Guest]: so their sexual chastity is placed above
[Guest]: everything else, above them being
[Guest]: brothers, above them being human beings, above them being
[Guest]: wives, it is about being sexually chaste
[Guest]: so it is the control of a
[Guest]: woman's sexuality which is so important
[Guest]: whereas the Timurids are very
[Guest]: pragmatic about the fact that they are constantly
[Guest]: travelling, they are constantly warring
[Guest]: therefore their women are sometimes captured
[Guest]: it is not their fault, indeed when they
[Guest]: are brought back they are always honoured
[Guest]: so this was something that I thought people might not
[Guest]: know about and that it's worth talking about
[Amit Varma]: This took me by surprise and what also took me
[Amit Varma]: by surprise about Khanzada was that
[Guest]: she marries again and you contrast
[Amit Varma]: that with the stigma on widow remarriage
[Amit Varma]: in India where once you are widowed
[Amit Varma]: if you don't immolate yourself
[Guest]: you basically wear white and you are pretty much done
[Guest]: Correct, in fact
[Guest]: the Timurids regularly encouraged
[Guest]: remarriage and many of the women we find
[Guest]: were remarried and Anbar
[Guest]: even talks about it clearly
[Guest]: and says you know I don't understand
[Guest]: why amongst the Hindus a woman
[Guest]: when she is widowed
[Guest]: she is not allowed to go to another man
[Guest]: he says I don't understand this
[Guest]: and I don't understand that a man
[Guest]: finds virtue in making
[Guest]: his wife die when he dies
[Guest]: so he was actually puzzled by this
[Guest]: he could not understand this whole concept
[Guest]: of sexual chastity and he
[Guest]: finally forbade it and he said
[Guest]: especially if the woman is young when she gets
[Guest]: widowed and if she has
[Guest]: perhaps not even lain
[Guest]: with her husband because he died so young
[Guest]: she is absolutely not to
[Guest]: commit sati and in any case
[Guest]: she is never to be forced so you know
[Guest]: he sent ministers out
[Guest]: into his empire to make sure that no woman
[Guest]: now how much that happened on the ground
[Guest]: I don't know but they were to check
[Guest]: every case of sati and make sure
[Guest]: that if the woman was determined only
[Guest]: then would she be allowed to commit sati
[Guest]: and no one was to force her so he was
[Guest]: very puzzled so clearly this was
[Guest]: a deeply entrenched aspect
[Guest]: of the Timurids or the Mughals
[Guest]: that there was no shame
[Guest]: in remarrying if you
[Guest]: are widowed it was not your fault unlike
[Guest]: the Hindus who thought it is your fate if you are
[Guest]: widowed that means it is something you have
[Guest]: perhaps some crime or punishment for
[Guest]: some past life misdeed and therefore
[Guest]: you lose your husband and you
[Guest]: must die. They felt they didn't
[Guest]: see things in the same way at all so a woman's
[Guest]: chastity was not valued
[Guest]: above everything else about above
[Guest]: her abilities above her
[Guest]: capacity to form a new relationship
[Guest]: so I found that very interesting
[Guest]: right from the time of Khandzada so that means
[Guest]: 500 years ago you know from the time
[Guest]: of Babur itself there was no
[Guest]: undue importance laid on a woman's
[Guest]: honor being related to her chastity
[Amit Varma]: no and you know we often sort
[Amit Varma]: of in our popular conception
[Amit Varma]: of those times today we think
[Amit Varma]: of them as invading barbarians
[Amit Varma]: who came into our very evolved
[Amit Varma]: culture and all of that and
[Amit Varma]: sort of spoilt it
[Amit Varma]: but here it strikes to me and even
[Amit Varma]: you know lot of what else is in your book
[Amit Varma]: also points out that they were actually fairly enlightened
[Guest]: in many ways towards their women
[Guest]: not as much as we would like today
[Guest]: of course but no but even
[Guest]: so for those times I find
[Guest]: that it was quite
[Guest]: refreshingly honest the way they
[Guest]: viewed their women that we always think
[Guest]: of them in purdah there was a very light
[Guest]: very porous purdah in fact
[Guest]: you know we forget that they are descendants
[Guest]: of Timur and that is whom they claim
[Guest]: as their forefather and if we look
[Guest]: at Timur's court for example there is the
[Guest]: writings of the
[Guest]: Spanish ambassador I think Rui Gonzalez
[Guest]: who writes about his encounters at
[Guest]: the Timur court he goes there as an ambassador he is
[Guest]: received very well he attends all these parties
[Guest]: and he writes about Timur's
[Guest]: wife and he can
[Guest]: the fact that he writes about her physically
[Guest]: he describes her that means he can see her
[Guest]: and her veil is very very light
[Guest]: so she can be easily seen by all the men
[Guest]: who are sitting there he describes
[Guest]: her complexion her hair everything so she is
[Guest]: clearly visible she comes and sits
[Guest]: between them there are men with her
[Guest]: there are women with her it is a mixed gathering
[Guest]: and she drinks and her friends the women
[Guest]: all drink and in fact he writes that they drink
[Guest]: sometimes a little too much so you see
[Guest]: this is a very different idea
[Guest]: of what we think a harem
[Guest]: may have been like here is a mixed company
[Guest]: they are singing and dancing he says for days
[Guest]: so this is something very different
[Guest]: the Timurs of course
[Guest]: they were conquerors also
[Guest]: and I am not going to gloss over that but they
[Guest]: were also great builders of city
[Guest]: they were great admirers of
[Guest]: culture of poetry of
[Guest]: language of literature Babur wrote his own biography
[Guest]: as you know a very entertaining biography
[Guest]: so there are these other aspects
[Guest]: they were not at all just
[Guest]: this marauding entity that
[Guest]: we have been made to believe
[Guest]: that they were they brought with them
[Guest]: a lot of other influences which remain
[Guest]: with us too which is very much part of our
[Guest]: DNA I think it is in the molecule of
[Guest]: every at least North Indian today
[Guest]: whether it is the food the clothes the language
[Guest]: the etiquette the adab that we have
[Guest]: it is all Timurid and it has
[Guest]: filtered down through us because these were
[Guest]: things that were valued in that time
[Guest]: when they came here they brought this all the
[Guest]: minor courts as they integrated
[Guest]: wanted to absorb this culture and they did
[Guest]: whether it was the Rajasthani courts
[Guest]: Jaisalmer, Amir all these courts
[Guest]: they took part of this culture and they
[Guest]: made it uniquely Indian
[Guest]: in that genius way that we have
[Guest]: but the root of it is
[Guest]: Timurid and it survived because it
[Guest]: was buoyant and it was vibrant
[Guest]: and it was something worth
[Amit Varma]: keeping. And what
[Amit Varma]: also kind of struck me you know while
[Amit Varma]: reading about Babur's adventures like
[Amit Varma]: you know after he lost Samarkand he was
[Amit Varma]: sort of travelling for a long time
[Amit Varma]: and then he finally goes to Kabul
[Amit Varma]: and he stays in Kabul for 20 years and then
[Amit Varma]: he you know goes to Hindustan
[Amit Varma]: where for the first time he really a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: women just stay behind and it kind of
[Amit Varma]: struck me that in all of this constant travel
[Amit Varma]: the sense of rootedness that he
[Unknown]: gets is from these women
[Amit Varma]: who you know
[Amit Varma]: and they are not just wives and mistresses
[Amit Varma]: they are aunts and his mother
[Amit Varma]: was his mother part of it?
[Guest]: Yes yes of course
[Amit Varma]: Hamida Banu Vega
[Amit Varma]: At one point you said that is where the sense of home
[Amit Varma]: comes from for these constant travellers
[Amit Varma]: and then he goes to Agra
[Amit Varma]: and you know
[Amit Varma]: when he finally wins his battle against Lodhi
[Amit Varma]: and he is sacking Agra and he
[Amit Varma]: sends so many jewels and riches
[Amit Varma]: and all of that which you have described in detail
[Amit Varma]: specifically for the women back to
[Amit Varma]: Kabul and one of the sort of threads
[Amit Varma]: running through the stories
[Amit Varma]: of Babur Humayun and all the way to Akbar
[Amit Varma]: is the love and reverence they have
[Guest]: for these women
[Guest]: Yes and in fact this list that you are talking
[Guest]: about of jewels and clothes
[Guest]: and dancing girls and all this that he
[Guest]: sends back is only listed
[Guest]: by Gulbadan no other biographer writes
[Guest]: about this so this again
[Guest]: if we didn't have a woman's voice we would
[Guest]: not see this aspect of their culture
[Guest]: of how they showed appreciation
[Guest]: of how wealth was distributed
[Guest]: so she writes in great detail about who was given
[Guest]: what so yes they
[Guest]: revere these women these women are
[Guest]: very important to them because they are
[Guest]: carriers of their culture
[Guest]: they are carriers of their language
[Guest]: of the stories they tell each other
[Guest]: of the stories they will tell the children so that the
[Guest]: children know where they come from who these
[Guest]: Timurids are you know so
[Guest]: they are very very essential
[Guest]: to the creation of a Timurid
[Guest]: legacy in India and one of the
[Guest]: very first thing where the Babur after Panipat
[Guest]: he says my generals
[Guest]: even though these are battle hardened
[Guest]: great men who are used to all
[Guest]: kinds of tribulations in the
[Guest]: heat of Hindustan they were like ok we have
[Guest]: won this battle for you now we are heading back to
[Guest]: Kabul so he realizes what's happening
[Guest]: and he calls for the women because he knows that
[Guest]: it is the women which will anchor the men
[Guest]: to a country it is not even riches
[Guest]: it is not even the
[Guest]: idea of future grandeur
[Guest]: it is the women because they bring with them a way
[Guest]: of life and it is this way of
[Guest]: life that can only be transmitted
[Guest]: the men are too busy doing their
[Guest]: battles and their you know interactions
[Guest]: with the
[Guest]: aggrandizing their territories it is the
[Guest]: women who bring their culture Akbar
[Guest]: does the same thing when he becomes king
[Guest]: so young and he starts
[Guest]: to found his empire one of the
[Guest]: first thing because at that point
[Guest]: Humayun died so early that he hadn't yet called
[Guest]: for his harem to come
[Guest]: from Kabul so one of the first thing
[Guest]: after he wins a few battles Akbar
[Guest]: similarly almost identically to Babur
[Guest]: realizes that his men will not stay
[Guest]: carry on like this because
[Guest]: you know they are feeling a little bit
[Guest]: orphaned in India now
[Guest]: you know and they are attacked by all
[Guest]: kinds of people who are trying to make their own
[Guest]: claims for the throne and they are ready
[Guest]: to leave and he does the same thing he calls
[Guest]: for the women and he writes and he
[Guest]: says these women are required
[Guest]: to have the men stay and for the men
[Guest]: to feel that this is a place that they
[Guest]: can call home that this is a place that one
[Guest]: day can be theirs and can be
[Guest]: you know part of their life so it's
[Guest]: very interesting and right till the later
[Guest]: stages the women are some of the last
[Guest]: to speak the Turkish language and
[Guest]: you know obviously your language is so
[Guest]: much part of your identity so
[Guest]: Gulbadan and Hamida Banu
[Guest]: all these women who spoke Turkish
[Guest]: as they die out we slowly
[Guest]: see that Turkish you know completely
[Guest]: loses its hold over these over
[Guest]: the men over the Pasha and they say
[Guest]: Jahangir I think says proudly
[Guest]: I can speak a few lines of Turkish
[Guest]: but clearly by then it is only
[Guest]: you know a sort of a flourish but it
[Guest]: is not their mother tongue anymore
[Guest]: it is the women who carry language
[Guest]: and who carry that sort of
[Guest]: the culture of memories and
[Amit Varma]: of stories. Yeah I mean home is
[Amit Varma]: where the women are and it also kind
[Amit Varma]: of strikes me while reading this book that you know looking
[Amit Varma]: back we know what happened again
[Amit Varma]: hindsight so you can you know we
[Unknown]: look as the Mughals okay they've been here for so many
[Amit Varma]: hundred years and blah blah blah but if you think
[Amit Varma]: about them at the time they've just
[Amit Varma]: landed up in this strange land they don't
[Amit Varma]: speak that language they have no roots
[Amit Varma]: there everyone is a foreigner
[Amit Varma]: and therefore suspicious and we
[Amit Varma]: think of the Mughal dynasty as a given and
[Amit Varma]: it's such a strong solid monolithic
[Amit Varma]: thing but after Humayun loses
[Amit Varma]: to Sher Shah Suri and he's just being
[Amit Varma]: chased all over the place you
[Amit Varma]: have absolutely I mean at that
[Amit Varma]: moment he has absolutely no idea how
[Guest]: he's going to end up. No not at all and in fact
[Guest]: at that time it seems like you know
[Guest]: the Mughals are only perhaps
[Guest]: you know an aberration of
[Guest]: a few years a few decades maybe you know with
[Guest]: Babur and that is all they will ever be
[Guest]: because the Sher Shah Suri
[Guest]: is a very talented man and it looks like
[Guest]: you know he will prosper
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: so it is true
[Guest]: that these
[Guest]: women I think without their presence
[Guest]: one almost feels
[Guest]: that perhaps the men would have also
[Guest]: lost hope at some point you know
[Guest]: and maybe not found it worth
[Guest]: their while because so many of their
[Guest]: generals were ready to leave at many
[Guest]: times you know of the empire
[Guest]: and it is only after Akbar really
[Guest]: that Akbar
[Guest]: begins to feel like a truly Hindustani
[Guest]: king you know his he spends
[Guest]: so much time with the locals from a very
[Guest]: young age he is always he has
[Guest]: this great ability to communicate with people
[Guest]: of all classes and he spends a
[Guest]: lot of time with all his animal keepers
[Guest]: and he learns the language very quickly
[Guest]: and it is with Akbar that we really feel that
[Guest]: these kings are here to stay and they are Hindustani
[Guest]: kings now you know and that they have
[Guest]: brought in this culture but Akbar often
[Guest]: puts on this timid culture
[Guest]: for show to impress an ambassador
[Guest]: or to impress some other
[Guest]: visiting timid but it is not who
[Guest]: he is he feels comfortable in
[Guest]: the culture of the country and you know
[Guest]: in the people that surround him
[Amit Varma]: who are now Hindustani. The most
[Amit Varma]: fascinating character in your book I found was
[Unknown]: Gulbadan herself and you write
[Amit Varma]: about how you know she saw Babur writing
[Amit Varma]: the Baburnama and then perhaps
[Amit Varma]: that's how she got inspired to write it
[Amit Varma]: and it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: it is only through Gulbadan in fact
[Amit Varma]: you're right I'll quote you it is
[Amit Varma]: through Gulbadan's account and only
[Amit Varma]: hers that we can see Babur as a loving
[Amit Varma]: father a tempestuous family man
[Amit Varma]: and a devoted husband stop
[Amit Varma]: quote and how different is
[Amit Varma]: her portrayal of those times from other
[Amit Varma]: you know contemporary accounts that you read
[Guest]: well it's completely
[Guest]: different you know because especially when men are
[Guest]: writing about somebody
[Guest]: like Babur then they will focus on his battles
[Guest]: on his charisma certainly
[Guest]: you know his magnetic ability
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: interact with other men because he had this
[Guest]: majlis of men that he was very comfortable with
[Guest]: so those men wrote about those gatherings
[Guest]: of men you know where they drank all night
[Guest]: and you know sang songs and
[Guest]: tried out different mixtures of
[Guest]: drugs and so on
[Guest]: so we have Babur the
[Guest]: amazing strategist because he was a
[Guest]: wonderful strategist and you know how many
[Guest]: battles he won the battle of Panipat
[Guest]: how it was he won
[Guest]: it amazingly against all odds
[Guest]: so we see only that side of it
[Guest]: which is wonderful but it is one side
[Guest]: of it with Gulbadan we see
[Guest]: how much he loves his family
[Guest]: how he prefers one wife over
[Guest]: another his first wife his main wife
[Guest]: he calls her by her name
[Guest]: which I find very moving because by the time of Akbar
[Guest]: you can no longer
[Guest]: pronounce a woman's name
[Guest]: and so therefore a certain part of their
[Guest]: identity is lost a name is so important
[Guest]: isn't it the way in which you are called
[Guest]: if you are only called by a title that somehow
[Guest]: it is meant to aggrandize you but on a
[Guest]: human level it reduces you because you
[Guest]: no longer have your own separate identity
[Guest]: but Babur calls her Maham Begum
[Guest]: so he always calls her by her name
[Guest]: and Gulbadan writes that oh he calls out to Maham
[Guest]: and when she is coming from Kabul
[Guest]: after an absence of I think
[Guest]: a year and a half he pushes aside
[Guest]: his attendant he pushes aside his horse and goes
[Guest]: running you know so this image of
[Guest]: this amazing conqueror but he is running
[Guest]: to meet his wife whom he hasn't met for one and a half
[Guest]: years and he takes Gulbadan in his
[Guest]: arms also you know six year old daughter
[Guest]: whom he hasn't seen and he makes her eat
[Guest]: does this wonderful feast which is prepared
[Guest]: so yes it is through Gulbadan that
[Guest]: we see a different aspect
[Guest]: of this man you know so that he is not just
[Guest]: one dimensional we see him more as a
[Guest]: complete human being so the accounts
[Guest]: of women in no way
[Guest]: do they denigrate a man
[Guest]: on the contrary you know they give a more
[Guest]: complex and nuanced understanding of the men
[Guest]: too so to understand women's
[Guest]: history to talk about them to explore them
[Guest]: is also to increase our understanding
[Guest]: of the men too it's not that it's in
[Guest]: any way making them less manly
[Amit Varma]: another of the interesting aspects of and
[Amit Varma]: this again goes back to the whole political economy
[Amit Varma]: angle of these harems so to say
[Amit Varma]: is how all of these women
[Amit Varma]: especially the senior women like
[Amit Varma]: Khanzada and Dildar Begum
[Amit Varma]: are you know playing this part
[Amit Varma]: in almost
[Amit Varma]: ruffling feathers you know bringing
[Amit Varma]: sons together making peace
[Amit Varma]: between brothers you know Khanzada goes on
[Amit Varma]: a number of missions and in fact dies on one
[Guest]: of those so called diplomatic missions to bring
[Guest]: brothers together that's right
[Guest]: tell me a little bit about that so in fact
[Guest]: one of the missions that she sent
[Guest]: on Humayun had to
[Guest]: fight with all of his brothers at one point
[Guest]: of or another three of his brothers
[Guest]: and the most resolute
[Guest]: of his brothers against him was Kamran
[Guest]: who never came round to him the other two did
[Guest]: so Kamran never came round to his side
[Guest]: and things were pretty hairy for him
[Guest]: at some times you know because he was being
[Guest]: chased by the Afghans by the Lodis
[Guest]: by the local chieftains the Rajput
[Guest]: chieftains and he can't even count on his own
[Guest]: brothers you know so in desperation
[Guest]: at one point you would think okay who is he
[Guest]: going to send to parlay with Kamran
[Guest]: maybe it is some you know
[Guest]: grizzled warrior maybe some you know
[Guest]: old man who holds a lot of respect
[Guest]: no he sends this elderly lady
[Guest]: Khansada Begum who is you know
[Guest]: who doesn't have independent status
[Guest]: of her own it's not that she has a
[Guest]: famous husband or famous son you know as
[Guest]: you know she was twice widowed and then married to
[Guest]: somebody not terribly
[Guest]: consequential but she
[Guest]: has this standing of her own
[Guest]: because they respect her so much you know because
[Guest]: she is a timid who is clearly
[Guest]: very intelligent they all look up to
[Guest]: her she is sensible and she is
[Guest]: this woman who is sent on a very dangerous
[Guest]: mission across icy passes
[Guest]: and mountains and you know she could have died
[Guest]: at any moment and she goes to Kamran
[Guest]: and she tells him do what Babur
[Guest]: would have wanted you to do so
[Guest]: she stands in lieu of Babur
[Guest]: the founder himself and says remember
[Guest]: what Babur would have wanted you to do
[Guest]: that Humayun is like your Patshah now he is
[Guest]: like your elder brother he is like your king you must
[Guest]: obey him now
[Guest]: the fact that Kamran doesn't really do that is
[Guest]: neither here nor there because he was intent
[Guest]: on getting the throne for himself
[Guest]: but he listens to her with respect you know
[Guest]: and then he keeps her with him and says
[Guest]: you stay with me because you are
[Guest]: symbolically very important but the
[Guest]: fact that she is sent on these missions shows
[Guest]: that when all else fails when there is nothing
[Guest]: left they still believe in the
[Guest]: power of somebody like Khanzada
[Guest]: on the power that she has through her charisma
[Guest]: of being a timid woman
[Guest]: you know independent of any man really
[Guest]: and I find that really just
[Amit Varma]: startling and amazing
[Guest]: just a moral authority she carries
[Amit Varma]: that's right
[Amit Varma]: does it strike you sometimes when you are studying history or writing history
[Amit Varma]: how important and
[Amit Varma]: consequential happenstance can become
[Amit Varma]: like not just for example the happenstance of
[Amit Varma]: that we happen to find the only
[Amit Varma]: biography of Gulbadan but
[Amit Varma]: even happenstance in history for example
[Amit Varma]: you write about
[Amit Varma]: how Humayun falls in love with this young
[Amit Varma]: girl called Hamida Banu Begum
[Amit Varma]: and she is really not interested
[Amit Varma]: and one of his foster mothers
[Amit Varma]: Dildar Begum is then playing its part
[Amit Varma]: trying to get her to convince and saying
[Amit Varma]: what better than you know marrying a
[Amit Varma]: king and he is not really a king at the moment
[Unknown]: he is a fugitive he is kind of running around
[Unknown]: with this small retinue and she is like
[Unknown]: you know trying to politely turn
[Unknown]: it down and it's all very interesting but
[Amit Varma]: it actually happens
[Amit Varma]: and you know and from there
[Amit Varma]: even when they are sort of
[Amit Varma]: going back to the present day
[Unknown]: Afghanistan side and
[Amit Varma]: it's news that another of his brothers
[Amit Varma]: might kill him and Humayun and
[Amit Varma]: Hamida go off and they leave little baby
[Amit Varma]: Akbar with wet nurses
[Amit Varma]: and somehow he survives all of that and
[Amit Varma]: if these things don't happen we don't have Akbar
[Amit Varma]: we don't have I mean the
[Amit Varma]: history of the subcontinent is completely
[Guest]: different completely different of course
[Guest]: if you read again if you read Abu Al-Fazl
[Guest]: and the male biographers then you will be told
[Guest]: that this is all predetermined and this
[Guest]: was meant to be and it is because Akbar
[Guest]: is a semi-divine king and it is all
[Guest]: stars you know so they go back to astrology
[Guest]: and they say that
[Guest]: the stars were aligned in just such a manner
[Guest]: that this would happen but of course
[Guest]: we know that it is as you
[Guest]: say happenstance and it is fortuitous
[Guest]: incidents like this you know and
[Guest]: in fact the fact that Hamida Banu
[Guest]: went with Humayun for two years they were
[Guest]: in Persia and you know they were almost
[Guest]: like itinerant backpackers because
[Guest]: they had nothing much at all you know they
[Guest]: had 40 total the retinue
[Guest]: when they went left India was 40
[Guest]: so that is not a very impressive cavalcade
[Guest]: you know when you are coming as the Badshah of
[Guest]: Hindustan and of course they are received
[Guest]: in Persia and
[Guest]: they are treated as kings
[Guest]: and queens but
[Guest]: the fact is that they spend most of those
[Guest]: two years just sightseeing
[Guest]: and they visit all these wonderful, Humayun is
[Guest]: an interesting character himself and
[Guest]: he visits all these interesting
[Guest]: you know sites and all this amazing
[Guest]: architecture, Persia is an amazing place
[Guest]: at that time
[Guest]: one of the you know cauldrons of
[Guest]: culture really in the world
[Guest]: and so they see all this amazing site
[Guest]: and Hamida Banu with him, they see carpets
[Guest]: they see architecture
[Guest]: they eat food which is amazing
[Guest]: also you know they talk about sharbat
[Guest]: cooled with ice water and you know this amazing
[Guest]: white linen and white bread which is made for
[Guest]: them and it is so evocative
[Guest]: and one wonders when they come back two years
[Guest]: later how much Hamida Banu
[Guest]: brings with her because she has seen all this
[Guest]: she has eaten all this, she has experienced all this
[Guest]: and when Gulbadan writes that
[Guest]: a new fashion of making tents
[Guest]: of arranging quarters
[Guest]: was introduced, then you think
[Guest]: okay maybe Hamida Banu Begum
[Guest]: introduced certain Persian
[Guest]: ways into Hindustan
[Guest]: and that is the way through which
[Guest]: it came, it's not just Humayun
[Guest]: it's not just the Persian immigrants
[Guest]: who then followed, it is Hamida Banu herself
[Guest]: and in fact
[Guest]: one of the
[Guest]: questions I bring up is the whole
[Guest]: question of who built Humayun's tomb
[Guest]: for something which became such an important
[Guest]: mausoleum, the mausoleum of the
[Guest]: Mughals themselves, it was
[Guest]: very little written about in its own time
[Guest]: I think people were too busy establishing
[Guest]: the empire, Akbar was very young at that time
[Guest]: he was still fighting for the throne when Humayun
[Guest]: died and the
[Guest]: Humayun's tomb was only begun several years
[Guest]: after his death, much later
[Guest]: and Akbar then moved to Agra
[Guest]: and then Fatehpur Sikhi and that became
[Guest]: the focus of his attention, so
[Guest]: Humayun's tomb in Delhi was not much
[Guest]: written about, so there's quite a lot of
[Guest]: question mark about who built Humayun's
[Guest]: tomb, you know, and
[Guest]: contemporary writers say
[Guest]: that it was his widow, so his
[Guest]: widow being Bega Begum who's also another
[Guest]: very interesting woman
[Guest]: and I wonder if the very
[Guest]: shape of Humayun's tomb which shows so much
[Guest]: Persian influence, perhaps
[Guest]: some of it comes from the fact that Bega Begum
[Guest]: would have talked to Hamida Banu Begum
[Guest]: her wife who she was very friendly with, they had
[Guest]: a very good relationship according to
[Guest]: how Gulbuddin writes about it, they may
[Guest]: have compared notes, she may have talked about the
[Guest]: mausoleums that she visited in her two years
[Guest]: in Persia and some of them, of course this
[Guest]: is all far-fetched and this is again, you know
[Guest]: wondering, but it's a wondering
[Guest]: which is worth doing, that perhaps
[Guest]: they talked about it, she talked about these things
[Guest]: and then along with the Persian architect, there was
[Guest]: a Persian architect, this wonderful
[Guest]: tomb was built and Bega Begum
[Guest]: then looked after it for the rest of her life
[Guest]: and yet certain people now
[Guest]: certain scholars will say that Akbar built it
[Guest]: I think what the question is
[Guest]: is who determines ownership
[Guest]: how do you determine ownership of a
[Guest]: thing, a monument? It may be
[Guest]: money, Akbar must have supplied most of the money
[Guest]: he was the emperor and he had a lot of money
[Guest]: certainly, but isn't it also
[Guest]: the person who has loved it
[Guest]: who has loved it into being
[Guest]: who has brought in some of the ideas, who
[Guest]: spent the rest of her life looking after it
[Guest]: and who has devoted herself
[Guest]: to that tomb, so in my chapter
[Guest]: on that, I say, let us not
[Guest]: take away ownership, people in
[Guest]: that time said, Bega Begum built
[Guest]: Humayun's tomb, you see, so let us not
[Guest]: take it away so easily because
[Guest]: these examples are not lying thick on the ground
[Guest]: of women doing things, so we must hang on
[Guest]: to each instance that we have and fight
[Amit Varma]: for it. And it's very tempting for male historians
[Amit Varma]: to just imagine that if anything
[Amit Varma]: great exists, like a great monument
[Unknown]: it's obviously a man
[Amit Varma]: and one of the concrete things
[Amit Varma]: which did come
[Amit Varma]: from Persia is of course
[Amit Varma]: the whole art of the Mughal miniature
[Amit Varma]: really originated there because
[Amit Varma]: they got painters back from there
[Amit Varma]: and they were completely enthralled
[Amit Varma]: by the work that happened there
[Amit Varma]: and that cultural influence came in
[Amit Varma]: from there. We'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and when we come back, we move
[Amit Varma]: on to the second period of
[Unknown]: The Great Mughal Era.
[Unknown]: We're just trying to get some additional information
[Unknown]: that will help us get more advertisers
[Unknown]: on board.
[Unknown]: Speaking of shows, on Mr. & Mrs. Binge Watch
[Unknown]: Janice and Aniru talk about HBO's
[Unknown]: new teen drama series, Euphoria
[Unknown]: and on the Geek Food Podcast, we have a treat
[Unknown]: for the Breaking Bad fans. Join hosts Jishnu
[Unknown]: and Tejas as they discuss El Camino,
[Unknown]: a Breaking Bad movie. Simplified is back again
[Unknown]: with part 4 of their 150th episode.
[Unknown]: In this episode, they talk about the implications
[Unknown]: of Brexit and the transformation of Dubai.
[Unknown]: Speaking of other countries, on Postcards from Nowhere
[Unknown]: Utsav talks about his trip to Turkey with his
[Unknown]: friends and how you can curate your travel
[Unknown]: to make them the most fun and memorable experiences.
[Unknown]: On our Kannada Podcast, Thalle Harate
[Unknown]: Satya Sankaran joins Pawan Srinath
[Unknown]: to talk about how non-motorized transport
[Unknown]: needs new thinking, behavior, policy,
[Unknown]: infrastructure, action and more.
[Unknown]: On The Origin of Things, Chuck narrates an interesting story
[Unknown]: about a Brazilian company that struggled its way
[Unknown]: through World War II and the Great Depression.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ira Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: about her wonderful book Daughters of the Sun
[Amit Varma]: and we've just finished talking
[Amit Varma]: about the ladies and the
[Amit Varma]: lives of Babur and Humayun.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm almost feeling embarrassed
[Amit Varma]: having to say the ladies and the lives of Babur
[Guest]: and Humayun, you know, making the same mistake
[Guest]: that historians... Good, good.
[Guest]: Self-awareness is the beginning.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: Early on in your book, you say that
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you look at the women in this period,
[Amit Varma]: it can sort of be divided
[Amit Varma]: into three phases. That with the
[Amit Varma]: early Mughals, you have the older
[Amit Varma]: matriarchs who are really powerful
[Amit Varma]: people like Khanzada and I guess Zildar
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And Akbar
[Amit Varma]: onwards, the focus shifts first
[Amit Varma]: to foster mothers, I guess, in that
[Amit Varma]: immediate period where he's settling down.
[Amit Varma]: And then to wives. Yes. And then
[Amit Varma]: with the later Mughals, it shifts to
[Amit Varma]: like unmarried daughters. That's right.
[Amit Varma]: And is it sort of just happenstance or are there
[Amit Varma]: deeper reasons behind this kind of a
[Amit Varma]: shift and the kind of women
[Guest]: who are becoming dominant? Well,
[Guest]: I think initially the
[Guest]: matriarchs were important because
[Guest]: they were the ones carrying that culture.
[Guest]: So they were the ones who had the moral authority.
[Guest]: They were the ones who had that clout. They were the
[Guest]: ones who had that influence, you know, and respect.
[Guest]: The younger women were not
[Guest]: at that point that needed,
[Guest]: you know, you needed the older women who had that
[Guest]: authority with them, which the younger women
[Guest]: didn't have. And therefore, the
[Guest]: Babur and Humayun were particularly
[Guest]: respectful of these older women.
[Guest]: All the Mughals were right down the line,
[Guest]: but the ones who had that visibility,
[Guest]: let us say, are the older women.
[Guest]: Because I think they, at a time of very
[Guest]: great uncertainty, of vulnerability of the
[Guest]: empire, they are the ones who brought
[Guest]: that sort of counterpart
[Guest]: and that weight and that culture
[Guest]: with them. Then
[Guest]: Akbar, in his early years,
[Guest]: because as we know, he was abandoned as a
[Guest]: baby, and I think probably that is one reason
[Guest]: for those few years before his parents
[Guest]: came back, but the entire time of 10 years
[Guest]: in Kabul, he was surrounded
[Guest]: by his foster families.
[Guest]: And I think that possibly shaped
[Guest]: him very deeply.
[Guest]: He may have somewhere
[Guest]: felt that whereas his parents had
[Guest]: abandoned him, his foster families
[Guest]: stood by him, protected him
[Guest]: physically, from his uncle Kamran,
[Guest]: who was always a slightly volatile
[Guest]: character, from Askari,
[Guest]: and from all the dangers around
[Guest]: a child, a baby, you know.
[Guest]: So I have a feeling that these years shaped
[Guest]: him so that he had this love,
[Guest]: this affection, and
[Guest]: this gratitude to his foster families
[Guest]: throughout his life, so that his
[Guest]: foster brothers could get
[Guest]: away almost with murder and he forgave
[Guest]: them, like Aziz Koka could say all kinds
[Guest]: of cheeky and disrespectful things to him in the
[Guest]: open court, and Akbar would
[Guest]: mostly laugh it off or shrug it off, you know,
[Amit Varma]: make light of it. In fact, he very memorably
[Guest]: said that there is a river of milk between
[Amit Varma]: us. That is right. He so poetically said that.
[Guest]: Such a beautiful phrase. Such a beautiful phrase, exactly right.
[Guest]: And so, you know,
[Guest]: he was very, very grateful
[Guest]: I think to his foster families and his foster
[Guest]: mothers, therefore. And the
[Guest]: one who
[Guest]: was most ambitious, let us say,
[Guest]: was Mahamanga. There were
[Guest]: others that he loved perhaps more, like Jiji
[Guest]: Anga, Aziz Koka's mother,
[Guest]: but she was not ambitious in that sense.
[Guest]: She was always there with Akbar, but
[Guest]: I don't find any records of her
[Guest]: doing anything of her own
[Guest]: in terms of architecture or commissioning
[Guest]: anything, but Mahamanga was.
[Guest]: She was an ambitious woman, she was a talented woman,
[Guest]: so was her son, but he was again very volatile,
[Guest]: Adham Khan. And
[Guest]: Mahamanga, so therefore at the
[Guest]: time of the early years of
[Guest]: Akbar, when he hasn't yet come into his
[Guest]: own, when he is in the force of nature that
[Guest]: we later know him to be, Mahamanga
[Guest]: is very, very powerful and
[Guest]: it is written that she practically
[Guest]: ran the empire for those two years
[Guest]: until Adham Khan
[Guest]: oversteps the boundaries and therefore
[Guest]: Mahamanga also falls.
[Guest]: So, we have that short period of time
[Guest]: in which there are the foster mothers
[Guest]: and it is short, but it is not inconsequential
[Guest]: because she carries out many orders,
[Guest]: she runs the empire and she builds
[Guest]: one of the first great mosques,
[Guest]: Mughal mosques of Delhi, which is today
[Guest]: completely forgotten. It's the Kherul Manazil
[Guest]: Madrasa and mosque complex
[Guest]: which is opposite Old Fort
[Guest]: and today it is in ruins sadly,
[Guest]: but it is a wonderful testament of a
[Guest]: non-royal Mughal woman
[Guest]: and it is clearly written, there's a
[Guest]: writing on it in Persian
[Guest]: saying that this has been commissioned by
[Guest]: Mahamanga. So, she's put her name to it.
[Guest]: You see her ambition, you see her desire
[Guest]: for her name to continue
[Guest]: in posterity. And so,
[Guest]: after these short years, once the
[Guest]: matriarchs die out, they stay out
[Guest]: for quite a long time, Hamida Banu and
[Guest]: Gulbadan, Bega Begum dies
[Guest]: first, but there's Gulbadan and there's Hamida Banu,
[Guest]: they continue. Because Hamida Banu
[Guest]: was so young when she got
[Guest]: married and she had Akbar, she died
[Guest]: only a couple of years before her son.
[Guest]: So, almost his entire life, he
[Guest]: had these matriarchs who remained very
[Guest]: powerful and visible
[Guest]: despite Abu Al-Fazl's attempt
[Guest]: to make them invisible. So, Gulbadan
[Guest]: goes on this wonderful all-women's hajj
[Guest]: which is a remarkable thing for a
[Guest]: 16th century Muslim woman to do. And
[Guest]: she spends a full seven years
[Guest]: before she comes back to Fatehpur Sikhi.
[Guest]: So, one imagines the kind of adventure that
[Guest]: she goes through and how much she must have
[Guest]: enjoyed herself to have stayed away from
[Amit Varma]: this opulent court. And you described
[Amit Varma]: even when they came back, she didn't go directly
[Amit Varma]: from the shore to the, you know, she's
[Guest]: going everywhere and really chilling with her.
[Guest]: Exactly. You would think if she really wanted to get
[Guest]: back, she'd rush back home. But she first goes
[Guest]: to Ajmer to see the Dargah, you know, she does
[Guest]: all the other minor pilgrimages.
[Guest]: So, she's clearly having the time of her
[Guest]: life, you know. And what a pity that she
[Guest]: hasn't written about that.
[Guest]: So, yes. So, there are these
[Guest]: matriarchs who remain influential
[Guest]: almost till the end of Akbar's
[Guest]: life. So, we don't hear
[Guest]: a great deal about the other
[Guest]: women at this time. It is only after he
[Guest]: passes away that one hears more
[Guest]: about the power of his mother,
[Guest]: Harkabai, the Rajput princess of
[Guest]: Ajmer, who is, of course, in popular
[Guest]: literature misrepresented as
[Guest]: Jodhabai in Jodha Akbar. That is completely
[Guest]: untrue. She was not from Jodhpur. She was
[Guest]: from Ajmer, which became Jaipur later
[Guest]: on. So,
[Guest]: it is only after Akbar passes away that
[Guest]: you see that Harkabai is a very
[Guest]: powerful, financially independent woman.
[Guest]: She has her own trading ships. She's
[Guest]: very interested in trade.
[Guest]: In fact, it even brings her up against the Portuguese
[Guest]: who are a real menace and whom she loathes.
[Guest]: And so did all the women. In fact, the
[Guest]: harem was very anti the Jesuit
[Guest]: missionaries. They found them
[Guest]: a nefarious and toxic influence
[Guest]: and they hated, obviously,
[Guest]: the things that they said against
[Guest]: both the Muslims and the Hindus.
[Guest]: In that way, they were quite democratic. They would criticize
[Guest]: both the Hindus and the Muslims.
[Guest]: So, both Harkabai and her retinue of Rajput
[Guest]: women hated them and so did the Muslim
[Guest]: ladies. They were like, who are these men
[Guest]: telling us
[Guest]: how to live our life?
[Guest]: So, it is only after Akbar died that
[Guest]: you see the power of Harkabai.
[Guest]: So, she trades and she has
[Guest]: interactions with the Portuguese
[Guest]: and she has even
[Guest]: a proxy fight with them.
[Guest]: But she's a powerful woman. We only
[Guest]: see that later on, for that short period
[Guest]: of time until she passes away.
[Guest]: And then the wives come into their own with
[Guest]: Nur Jahan, of course, famously.
[Guest]: And it is later, in the time of
[Guest]: Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb, that the
[Guest]: daughters become more powerful.
[Guest]: And I think it's because the daughters
[Guest]: now are carrying that bloodline.
[Guest]: They are the timid women because the wives are local
[Guest]: wives now. They are Hindustani wives, non-timid
[Guest]: wives. So, they do not carry that
[Guest]: charisma of the timid
[Guest]: which is necessary to perpetuate this
[Guest]: legacy. So, it is the daughters who take on
[Guest]: that role. Jahanara Begum is a timid
[Guest]: woman and she claims that legacy
[Guest]: very forcefully. And I found that is
[Guest]: what attracted me to her.
[Guest]: Just like the men did. In fact, almost
[Guest]: more than the men did. She said, I am a timid
[Guest]: woman. I will build these
[Guest]: buildings. She built so many structures
[Guest]: in Old Delhi.
[Guest]: She wrote biographies.
[Guest]: She was a Sufi peer. She had
[Guest]: a Sufi journey. She wrote about that in her
[Guest]: biography. And she does all this
[Guest]: claiming that she is blessed
[Guest]: and is perpetuating the timid lamp,
[Guest]: the knowledge of the timid. So, that
[Guest]: is very important. It is because of her bloodline
[Guest]: that she is able to claim this
[Guest]: sort of descendants and legacy.
[Guest]: So, that is why the daughters then become
[Guest]: important. As does Roshanara.
[Guest]: But she is just...
[Guest]: One of the Europeans, I forget, Bernier,
[Guest]: somebody wrote acutely but cruelly
[Guest]: that she is also very beautiful but
[Guest]: less beautiful than Jahanara. She is also talented
[Guest]: but less than Jahanara. So, she was always
[Guest]: second best. But these
[Guest]: women were powerful. They were incredibly
[Guest]: wealthy. All the Europeans who wanted
[Guest]: to trade at court had to
[Guest]: parlay with them
[Guest]: and had to interact with them and they
[Guest]: ignored them at their own peril.
[Guest]: I think one of them, Thomas Rowe, first thought
[Guest]: that he would do without Jahanara Begum
[Guest]: and it worked out
[Guest]: very badly and he had to scramble later on
[Guest]: to make up for that. So, these women,
[Guest]: Noor Jahan, Jahanara and Roshanara
[Guest]: were very influential later on.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that struck me about
[Amit Varma]: Akbar's times,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, two of the fundamental shifts that happened
[Amit Varma]: and one was sort of a cultural shift
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that he was marrying a lot of
[Amit Varma]: Rajput women in alliances
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And that had an influence. Like in just one
[Amit Varma]: context, you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: In just a few years, this Rajasthani
[Amit Varma]: style will irrevocably
[Amit Varma]: influence Mughal court dress and etiquette.
[Amit Varma]: Tight jackets and tunics and diaphanous
[Amit Varma]: materials elaborately printed
[Amit Varma]: will replace the more pragmatic flowing
[Amit Varma]: kabhas of the Mughal women.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not just in dress.
[Amit Varma]: In every possible way,
[Guest]: it had an influence on the court.
[Guest]: It did. It had an influence
[Guest]: which was, I think, both ways.
[Guest]: More than we acknowledge.
[Guest]: The Rajputs
[Guest]: obviously adopted a great deal
[Guest]: from the Mughals, from their culture.
[Guest]: The miniature paintings went to the minor courts
[Guest]: of Rajasthan and they flourished
[Guest]: when Akbar commissioned the
[Guest]: Razam Namas, which was a translation of the Mahabharata.
[Guest]: This extraordinary document which
[Guest]: required Brahmin priests
[Guest]: sitting together with Persian theologians
[Guest]: and writers and translators
[Guest]: and all this amazing intellectual work
[Guest]: going on so that the Mahabharata, this
[Guest]: amazing Sanskrit script was translated
[Guest]: into Persian.
[Guest]: When the Rajputs saw this, they also commissioned one.
[Guest]: They said we will be no less and they commissioned one
[Guest]: which had twice the number of paintings that the Mughals had.
[Guest]: So you see, they were very much influenced
[Guest]: as well and they took all these
[Guest]: elements back to their court, whether it was
[Guest]: in architecture, the paintings
[Guest]: and of course the Mughals were completely
[Guest]: altered by the interaction with the Rajputs.
[Guest]: Definitely in art,
[Guest]: and you can see in Fatehpur Sikri
[Guest]: this mixing of styles, Gujarati, Rajasthani,
[Guest]: you know, Timurid of course.
[Guest]: It was very much because
[Guest]: of Rajasthan, but the interesting thing
[Guest]: that I have also
[Guest]: talked about and I'm talking about more in my
[Guest]: next book is the way
[Guest]: they were influenced in terms of the
[Guest]: women's life and the purdah
[Guest]: specifically. We normally tend to assume
[Guest]: that the purdah came with the Mughals,
[Guest]: that they brought it with them from Central Asia
[Guest]: into India and I'm wondering
[Guest]: if it is not more a sort of
[Guest]: a two-way thing
[Guest]: that when they came in, they seemed to
[Guest]: have, as I said, a very porous purdah
[Guest]: indeed. Many of the women were visible, they had a very
[Guest]: light purdah, they were on horseback, they travelled
[Guest]: everywhere, they talked to the men openly,
[Guest]: you know, they interacted with them in mixed gatherings.
[Guest]: But this purdah that happened
[Guest]: happened more at Akbar's time
[Guest]: and we know that Rajasthani
[Guest]: Rajput society at this time
[Guest]: had a purdah system which
[Guest]: was extremely intransigent
[Guest]: and their women were very much cloistered
[Guest]: in fact the higher up in the echelon
[Guest]: they were, the higher were the walls
[Guest]: physically of their, you know, of their zanana.
[Guest]: So even light could not enter.
[Guest]: Their purdah
[Guest]: was so restrictive that they were meant to cover
[Guest]: their heads even in front of senior women.
[Guest]: So their mothers-in-law, for many years a young
[Guest]: bride could not cover, uncover her face
[Guest]: whereas the Mughals never had any such thing,
[Guest]: they interacted freely with other women.
[Guest]: So I am wondering whether
[Guest]: this is not also something which the Rajputs
[Guest]: brought with them which became
[Guest]: something that Akbar then thought would be
[Guest]: good to emulate because these are high caste
[Guest]: Rajput men who are introducing this system
[Guest]: therefore it is something that he
[Guest]: as a Mughal emperor should also bring
[Guest]: into his harem, you know, as Patshah of India.
[Guest]: And perhaps a two-way thing,
[Guest]: perhaps the Rajasthanis then saw
[Guest]: how the empire was
[Guest]: forming, how the court was becoming more
[Guest]: ossified and more stratified,
[Guest]: how the harem was becoming tighter, the zanana
[Guest]: was higher and they brought even more
[Guest]: restriction to their women so that
[Guest]: by the end of it both societies
[Guest]: have their women tightly cloistered
[Guest]: and invisible in a way.
[Guest]: So yes, the interaction with
[Guest]: Rajasthan, with the Rajput culture
[Guest]: is something which I think has become
[Guest]: so organic that it would be difficult
[Guest]: to say where the Mughal starts and where the Rajput ends.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also pointed out in your book,
[Amit Varma]: the second big shift perhaps is that
[Amit Varma]: now the zanana becomes something
[Amit Varma]: sort of separate
[Amit Varma]: where Akbar starts spending more and more time
[Amit Varma]: with men whether they are, you know,
[Unknown]: theologians or artists or whatever
[Amit Varma]: and the zanana becomes a separate thing
[Amit Varma]: and it raises a management problem. Again, to quote
[Amit Varma]: from your book, you write, quote
[Amit Varma]: the very large number of women now in Akbar
[Amit Varma]: zanana has brought up a very
[Amit Varma]: vexatious question even for a great statesman
[Amit Varma]: such as Akbar. This troublesome question
[Amit Varma]: is though it is only through
[Amit Varma]: order that the world becomes a meadow of
[Amit Varma]: truth and reality, this order
[Amit Varma]: yearningly aspired to by Abu al-Fazl
[Amit Varma]: for Akbar is hard to maintain in the
[Amit Varma]: raucous community of women, children,
[Amit Varma]: staff, relatives, guards, tutors
[Amit Varma]: and assorted entourage
[Amit Varma]: that Akbar zanana has become.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: How does he handle this?
[Guest]: Well, first we have to
[Guest]: consider what Abu al-Fazl is saying.
[Guest]: Abu al-Fazl states
[Guest]: that Akbar has 5000 women
[Guest]: in his zanana. Now anybody who has visited
[Guest]: Fatehpur Sikri will know that this is a gross
[Guest]: exaggeration. You would be
[Guest]: absolutely like sardines in a can if there were
[Guest]: 5000 women in what were
[Guest]: pretty modest
[Guest]: quarters if you're talking about
[Guest]: a sum like 5000. He says
[Guest]: 5000 to aggrandize Akbar.
[Guest]: He says 5000 to show
[Guest]: how mighty Akbar is, that he can
[Guest]: provide for and protect 5000
[Guest]: women, that he requires 5000 women
[Guest]: around him in his zanana.
[Guest]: So it is a gross exaggeration.
[Guest]: The Europeans talk about
[Guest]: 300 women. Even there we're not
[Guest]: talking about 300 wives at all.
[Guest]: So there's always this
[Guest]: assumption that these 5000 women are
[Guest]: sexually available to Akbar. They're his wives.
[Guest]: This is complete nonsense.
[Guest]: If you do the calculations, Akbar would
[Guest]: have done nothing but spend time with his wives
[Guest]: if he had 5000 women. How would he have
[Guest]: founded this amazing empire?
[Guest]: Firstly, one has to look at
[Guest]: what Abu al-Fazl is saying.
[Guest]: Even considering the fact that there were not
[Guest]: 5000 women, there were a lot of women
[Guest]: because now all these Rajasthani ladies
[Guest]: brought their retinues
[Guest]: with them. And this is one thing that the Rajputs
[Guest]: did is that when they sent out their daughters,
[Guest]: they didn't just send them alone to
[Guest]: their in-laws. They sent them completely accompanied
[Guest]: because they did not trust the food,
[Guest]: what they would get in their in-law
[Guest]: family. So they brought in all
[Guest]: their infrastructure with them.
[Guest]: Whether they were priests, whether they were
[Guest]: masseuse, whether they were teachers, whether they were
[Guest]: pandits, these were all women. Interesting to know
[Guest]: the women were carrying on all these roles.
[Guest]: So this structure that Abu al-Fazl
[Guest]: tries to create as being
[Guest]: extremely ordered must have been
[Guest]: something which was quite rambunctious and out of
[Guest]: control in a way if he has to keep saying that it was
[Guest]: a very chaste place and a very ordered place.
[Guest]: But the fact is that it was managed.
[Guest]: It was like a city in miniature.
[Guest]: It was like a government in miniature. You had a daroga,
[Guest]: you had somebody taking notes, somebody
[Guest]: who took accounts, somebody who
[Guest]: showed those accounts to the Patsha,
[Guest]: who presented to the Patsha
[Guest]: all the requirements of the women. The women
[Guest]: would also make requests every day
[Guest]: for charity for poor women
[Guest]: they would support. Those requests
[Guest]: were made before the emperor every afternoon.
[Guest]: So there was this very complicated
[Guest]: and intrinsic bureaucracy and
[Guest]: life which was going on in the Zainana
[Guest]: which was not at all
[Guest]: the one that Abu al-Fazl was
[Guest]: hoping to create. It was something
[Guest]: that we have forgotten because of the sanitized way
[Guest]: that he talks about it. But it was
[Guest]: a very lively place. It was a place
[Guest]: where a great deal
[Guest]: of power was exercised by the women
[Guest]: and where they managed in many
[Guest]: ways to escape this veil
[Guest]: in one way or the other, you know,
[Guest]: despite the attempts by Abu al-Fazl
[Amit Varma]: to keep them constrained.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, at one point you write after Gulbadan comes back
[Amit Varma]: from the Hajj, you write, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: the Zainana at Fatehpur secreted Gulbadan
[Amit Varma]: returns to in 1582 is very
[Amit Varma]: different from the Haramana for wandering with Humayun.
[Amit Varma]: The great tented mobile cities
[Amit Varma]: have disappeared, replaced by the
[Amit Varma]: sandstone and marble walls and palaces
[Amit Varma]: of Akbar Zainana. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: But what is happening here, interestingly,
[Amit Varma]: is that even though these women are
[Amit Varma]: largely being kept separate and the whole
[Amit Varma]: management has changed that
[Amit Varma]: the matriarchs that remain are still
[Amit Varma]: very influential in politics
[Amit Varma]: and political manners
[Amit Varma]: matters, for example, how they help
[Unknown]: Saleem, whom we later
[Guest]: know as Jahangir come to power.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit. So it's
[Guest]: interesting that though on the one
[Guest]: hand we are told by many writers and
[Guest]: many Europeans that this was a place of gossip
[Guest]: and intrigue and backbiting and you know
[Guest]: jealousies among the women.
[Guest]: I find that actually they were very
[Guest]: united in their cause, these women.
[Guest]: And when they supported a prince, it was usually
[Guest]: everyone together. When they
[Guest]: tried to get somebody
[Guest]: thrown out of court or out of
[Guest]: favor, it was all together. Whether it was
[Guest]: the Jesuit missionaries who eventually had to go
[Guest]: and they attribute their fault
[Guest]: to the fact that the wives
[Guest]: and women of Akbar were against them.
[Guest]: So they were very powerful and they
[Guest]: seemed very united in their cause.
[Guest]: And Saleem was a great example
[Guest]: of that. He was a complicated
[Guest]: prince who had a complicated
[Guest]: relationship with a very
[Guest]: powerful father. So this father-son
[Guest]: dynamic was something which was difficult to
[Guest]: navigate for him, you know. And I think
[Guest]: he often relied on the support of the
[Guest]: women. And at one point, I think in
[Guest]: open court, I think it was Salima Sultan
[Guest]: Begum from behind the jali, she says
[Guest]: you know Pacha, we have something to say to you
[Guest]: and if you don't come to us, we will
[Guest]: come to you. So I found that really
[Guest]: funny. I was like, this is a threat. They are saying
[Guest]: that they are going to come out in open court
[Guest]: and create a scene if he doesn't come to them
[Guest]: and listen to their woes or whatever
[Guest]: a farmaish they want to make.
[Guest]: And he goes. So
[Guest]: they were very united in their cause and
[Guest]: when they supported a prince, princes
[Guest]: really relied on this support
[Guest]: to get further and to get
[Guest]: gain of cause for whatever they
[Amit Varma]: wanted to achieve. And in the case of Saleem
[Amit Varma]: in fact, you know his estrangement
[Amit Varma]: was so severe that when Akbar sent
[Amit Varma]: Abu al-Fazl, he got Abu al-Fazl
[Amit Varma]: beheaded, which would not have made
[Amit Varma]: some of the women so unhappy, I imagine
[Amit Varma]: going by the histories
[Amit Varma]: that he eventually wrote.
[Amit Varma]: But then Salima Sultan Begum
[Amit Varma]: steps in and she helps her father and the
[Guest]: son come together and then eventually
[Guest]: there is a rapprochement despite the one beheaded
[Guest]: friend of Akbar. Yes, one beheaded
[Guest]: friend, exactly. And it is
[Guest]: of course they wrote that we can only
[Guest]: imagine Akbar's, you know, great
[Guest]: disarray and distress at the death of
[Guest]: his great friend. So, to have
[Guest]: brought about this rapprochement when
[Guest]: Saleem has crossed such a
[Guest]: line and committed such a grave
[Guest]: error shows the influence of the
[Guest]: women that they were, despite that
[Guest]: and Salima Sultan Begum is sent out
[Guest]: to do this job, which is interesting because
[Guest]: on her own, well, Akbar
[Guest]: marries her but it almost seems to be
[Guest]: a marriage of convenience. They have no children
[Guest]: together and she is older to Akbar so maybe
[Guest]: he views her more as an older relative.
[Guest]: But, so despite the fact that she has
[Guest]: no son of her own, no, you know,
[Guest]: independent status of her own,
[Guest]: she has this respect and she is sent
[Guest]: to bring Saleem back
[Guest]: to influence Saleem also because he is
[Guest]: also of a mind to just create trouble
[Guest]: and to create his own court and
[Guest]: to challenge his father. She talks to him
[Guest]: and she brings gifts from his father and says, look
[Guest]: this elephant I am bringing from your
[Guest]: father that means, he means well
[Guest]: he is not out to harm you. And she
[Guest]: brings him to court and finally there is a
[Guest]: rapprochement between the two and Akbar does
[Amit Varma]: forgive Saleem for this heinous crime.
[Amit Varma]: And besides all the remarkable women
[Amit Varma]: in your story, there is also a
[Amit Varma]: remarkable ship, which of course is
[Amit Varma]: Rahimi, which is
[Amit Varma]: Harkabai's ship or Maryam Uzmani
[Amit Varma]: as she was known. And I found this whole
[Amit Varma]: episode with Maryam Uzmani
[Amit Varma]: and Rahimi and what happens to Rahimi
[Amit Varma]: very fascinating because this
[Amit Varma]: is again one of those happenstance things that
[Amit Varma]: it kind of almost causes
[Amit Varma]: a decline in the fortunes of
[Unknown]: Portuguese colonialism.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fascinating episode and Rahimi
[Amit Varma]: of course is described in this
[Amit Varma]: sentence that I found just
[Amit Varma]: lovely, which was described
[Amit Varma]: it as a Hindu Queen's Muslim ship
[Amit Varma]: carrying hutch pilgrims in Christian
[Amit Varma]: waters patrolled by the Portuguese
[Guest]: armada. Stop Guru. Yes.
[Guest]: Tell me what happened here. Well, you know
[Guest]: it's amazing and it just shows the polyphony
[Guest]: and you know the multiplicity
[Guest]: of the court at this
[Guest]: time is that, so as I said
[Guest]: after Akbar passed away
[Guest]: we see more visibly that Harkabai is
[Guest]: a very powerful woman and she has
[Guest]: a ship in her own name who sails under
[Guest]: her colors, the Rahimi.
[Guest]: So this is a hud ship
[Guest]: but the hud ships at the same time also
[Guest]: conducted trade.
[Guest]: There was a lot of trade in the Indian
[Guest]: Ocean between India and the Middle
[Guest]: East and further still
[Guest]: from way back and it was the Portuguese who
[Guest]: started controlling this and they introduced
[Guest]: piracy and rapacity and you know they were
[Guest]: pretty brutal in their dealings with the Indian
[Guest]: ships. So they were loathed
[Guest]: by everybody. You know everybody was
[Guest]: agreed that the Portuguese we need to find
[Guest]: a way to get them out of Indian waters
[Guest]: because they only create trouble and
[Guest]: they also since their hutch pilgrims have been
[Guest]: carried there they used to also look for any
[Guest]: chance to trouble the
[Guest]: pilgrims you know and to torture them if they could.
[Guest]: So Harkabai has
[Guest]: this ship called the Rahimi and
[Guest]: the Portuguese have introduced this system
[Guest]: because they do control the waters because of
[Guest]: superior naval power and they've brought
[Guest]: this system of the Kartaz which is
[Guest]: a pass that you have to have obtained
[Guest]: from the Portuguese authority to have your
[Guest]: ship sail. Now the Mughals
[Guest]: hate this because the Kartaz has a
[Guest]: picture of the Holy Mary
[Guest]: and they really hate the fact that
[Guest]: their pilgrims they're going to Mecca
[Guest]: having to carry this pass with you know Christian
[Guest]: symbols on it. So it is in many ways
[Guest]: you know a flexing of muscles
[Guest]: and showing strength and who must
[Guest]: obey which laws and
[Guest]: so Harkabai detests the
[Guest]: idea that she has to you know kowtow to them
[Guest]: and obtain this pass but they do
[Guest]: and despite that
[Guest]: the ship is seized and
[Guest]: Harkabai is really furious at this
[Guest]: and she says we must
[Guest]: stop all trade with the Portuguese if this is
[Guest]: the way that they're going to treat our ships
[Guest]: and until this point really
[Guest]: none of the Mughals had really
[Guest]: confronted the Portuguese. The Mughals
[Guest]: their vision was more turned to
[Guest]: the land. It was more to the agricultural
[Guest]: hinterland where all the money was
[Guest]: the produce was you know where the great harvests
[Guest]: of India were. They were not looking
[Guest]: so much outwards towards the
[Guest]: seas. They did have a navy
[Guest]: it was largely a river navy
[Guest]: you know so they sailed the rivers
[Guest]: not so much the high seas.
[Guest]: So they had not really come into confrontation
[Guest]: not that they particularly want to
[Guest]: but when Harkabai made this demand
[Guest]: it effectively, now she never did
[Guest]: recover the Rahimi but it
[Guest]: effectively brought to an end
[Guest]: the great control that the Portuguese
[Guest]: had over the Indian waters and the English
[Guest]: are delighted because
[Guest]: they know that if the Portuguese are out and they've been
[Guest]: controlling the waters maybe it is the time of
[Guest]: the English finally and they write
[Guest]: with great delight and say the
[Guest]: Queen Mother is furious at the Portuguese
[Guest]: and this will spell the end
[Guest]: and in a way it did and so
[Guest]: happenstance again as you say
[Guest]: brought about this
[Guest]: this amazing
[Guest]: you know change in the politics
[Amit Varma]: of the waters. Do you sometimes get tempted
[Amit Varma]: just to forget about history's history
[Guest]: and write counterfactuals?
[Amit Varma]: Let's not even go there.
[Guest]: That would also take you back to literature right?
[Guest]: That's right. Which you said was your first love.
[Amit Varma]: The next character I want to talk about is
[Amit Varma]: Noor Jahan and she is
[Amit Varma]: really interesting because she has got
[Amit Varma]: really humble beginnings. Yes. She
[Amit Varma]: rises to great wealth even more than
[Unknown]: the emperor himself perhaps as you point out.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. But she has a kind of an
[Guest]: enormous end. Yes.
[Guest]: So Noor Jahan is a fascinating
[Guest]: character you know again
[Guest]: pretty poorly served by the
[Guest]: Europeans who always
[Guest]: imply that she holds the
[Guest]: emperor in sexual thrall so
[Guest]: it is a way a debasement of Jahangir
[Guest]: also and it is
[Guest]: you know they are showing her as this manipulative
[Guest]: sort of
[Guest]: virago type person you know which is doing her
[Guest]: a great disservice. As you say she
[Guest]: came as a refugee. Her family came as refugees
[Guest]: from Persia and they
[Guest]: came to Akbar's court and then they rose slowly
[Guest]: through the ranks. They were all very talented
[Guest]: whether it's her father who was prime minister, her
[Guest]: brother who controlled, who was very very
[Guest]: powerful, Noor Jahan herself.
[Guest]: Not just powerful, very very
[Guest]: talented people. They did things in all
[Guest]: fields. Her mother developed attar of
[Guest]: roses for example you know. She just
[Guest]: collected the skum after boiling roses and
[Guest]: found this amazing fragrance.
[Guest]: So they were a talented family
[Guest]: and she achieved a great deal
[Guest]: which Rubilal talks with
[Guest]: a great deal of authority. So I have not
[Guest]: written a great deal on
[Guest]: Noor Jahan because it is all there
[Guest]: in Rubilal's amazing book Empress
[Guest]: but what she says which is of interest to
[Guest]: me is the fact that we have
[Guest]: to see what Noor Jahan did
[Guest]: and see it in context
[Guest]: because in India we have a you know
[Guest]: history is taught in a sort of bullet point form
[Guest]: so we are told she shot lions,
[Guest]: she minted coins, she did this that and the
[Guest]: other. You learn all these four or five facts and you move
[Guest]: on to the next thing. But what you have to
[Guest]: realize is put in context
[Guest]: who shoots lions? Only
[Guest]: the Padshah. Nobody else is allowed to shoot
[Guest]: lions. It is a royal prerogative.
[Guest]: Who mints coins? Only the Padshah.
[Guest]: The Jharoka Darshan. Who sits
[Guest]: at the Jharoka and allows themselves
[Guest]: to be painted and represented as
[Guest]: sitting at the Jharoka? It is the
[Guest]: emperor. So if you put all these
[Guest]: points together that she does and she
[Guest]: does do all these things and put it in the
[Guest]: context of the time, it means as
[Guest]: Shubilal has said that she is co-empress.
[Guest]: She shares power
[Guest]: equally with Jahangir who shares that
[Guest]: power with her. He is not doing it because he is
[Guest]: debased or because he is in the throes
[Guest]: of alcohol or anything else.
[Guest]: He does it because he is happy to share
[Guest]: power with a very talented woman
[Guest]: at a time when he is poorly, his health
[Guest]: is failing and this woman
[Guest]: has the vision and the
[Guest]: aesthetic vision to carry his
[Guest]: legacy forward which she does
[Guest]: you know when we look at the tomb that she
[Guest]: builds for Itmad-ud-Daulah's tomb
[Guest]: outside Agra. If you look at that
[Guest]: tomb, it is the culmination
[Guest]: for me. That's why I have focused more on Itmad-ud-Daulah's
[Guest]: tomb and less the other aspects which
[Guest]: Shubilal has covered so well.
[Guest]: Itmad-ud-Daulah's tomb is the culmination
[Guest]: of Noor Jahan's talent and we look
[Guest]: at that building built years
[Guest]: before the Taj Mahal. It is in pure
[Guest]: white marble which had never been done before
[Guest]: and which Shah Jahan did because he saw
[Guest]: Itmad-ud-Daulah's tomb. It has got inlay
[Guest]: work which had never been done before which was later
[Guest]: copied in the Taj Mahal. So it is
[Guest]: a trailblazing monument. It is a
[Guest]: beautiful, exquisite monument
[Guest]: and if you look at, so she builds this for her parents.
[Guest]: She is very dedicated to her parents
[Guest]: who are both, as I said, very talented people.
[Guest]: When they die, she is heartbroken
[Guest]: and they die within three months of each other
[Guest]: which I also find very moving.
[Guest]: The wife dies
[Guest]: and Jahangir writes in his biography
[Guest]: that you know the poor man, Itmad-ud-Daulah
[Guest]: is heartbroken. I am trying to cheer him up
[Guest]: but I fear for his life and within three
[Guest]: months of his wife's death, he passes away
[Guest]: too. He is so, you know
[Guest]: he and his wife are so close
[Guest]: and then Nur Jahan builds this
[Guest]: beautiful tomb for them. At the same
[Guest]: time, Jahangir
[Guest]: is building a tomb for his mother, you know
[Guest]: not long after. Maryam
[Guest]: Uzzomani's tomb which you can see today also
[Guest]: outside Agra and it is a
[Guest]: thing of very little beauty
[Guest]: and very little grace and it is actually
[Guest]: a reconfigured Lodhi
[Guest]: Biradri. So he has just taken an existing
[Guest]: structure, added two, three things to it
[Guest]: and said I will bury my mother here.
[Guest]: So I talked about this once, you know
[Guest]: at a talk I was giving and I was saying
[Guest]: I think the lesson to be learnt here is that if you are
[Guest]: planning to build a mausoleum for yourself
[Guest]: give the task to your daughter not to
[Guest]: your son, you know because they take more
[Guest]: care with things like legacy and
[Guest]: memory and you know eternal
[Amit Varma]: sort of. Which some would say applies to more
[Guest]: things than just mausoleums.
[Amit Varma]: Digressing slightly, you know you said
[Amit Varma]: you have grown up in Delhi and you are surrounded by all these
[Amit Varma]: great historical monuments and buildings
[Amit Varma]: and tombs and so on. Do you look
[Guest]: at them differently now? I do.
[Guest]: I do, I do. That's a very
[Guest]: pertinent point that you have raised and I do
[Guest]: look at them very differently
[Guest]: and it's sad that we don't all do that
[Guest]: because we are surrounded by such treasures
[Guest]: in Delhi and many many other
[Amit Varma]: cities which we take for granted
[Guest]: all the time. Not only do we take
[Guest]: it for granted, we let them fall to ruin
[Guest]: to disrepair
[Guest]: and there are so many good people trying to
[Guest]: work against that and trying
[Guest]: to get us more aware of these amazing things
[Guest]: that we have just in our life
[Guest]: around us. If you compare with other
[Guest]: cities who don't have that
[Guest]: you know you feel bereft without all
[Guest]: this history. Here we take it for granted but it is
[Guest]: such a wonderful thing to have.
[Guest]: Now when I look at them, I look at the stones
[Guest]: and I see what they have to say
[Guest]: I know I can figure out what influence
[Guest]: is there, who came later, what they
[Guest]: tried to change. You can see
[Guest]: a Mughal building with a bit of a temple statue
[Guest]: element in it, you know that some temple
[Guest]: must have been broken and this
[Guest]: bit was taken because this was the
[Guest]: pragmatic reality. We used
[Guest]: materials whether one way or the other. You found
[Guest]: materials lying around, you used it
[Guest]: but if you are not told these things
[Guest]: and you don't have the eyes to see it
[Guest]: then you know it just gets wasted in a way
[Amit Varma]: and it's such a shame.
[Guest]: So do you go often to... I do.
[Guest]: So I go for a lot of heritage walks
[Guest]: part of my research
[Guest]: I call it part of my research though I love it immensely
[Guest]: is going for these walks because
[Guest]: we haven't talked a great deal about the
[Guest]: research process but there is the primary sources
[Guest]: there is the written material but there is also
[Guest]: this intangible thing around us
[Guest]: which is these heritage walks
[Guest]: where these people who are not
[Guest]: sometimes historians but sometimes amateurs
[Guest]: and enthusiasts, they are able to create
[Guest]: a sense of those times when you go on
[Guest]: these walks with them. They'll tell you
[Guest]: what music was playing perhaps
[Guest]: or what pan you were supposed to have
[Guest]: at this location or whether there was a well
[Guest]: there so you heard the trickling water
[Guest]: so these people are also part of my research
[Guest]: you know and I get a great deal of
[Guest]: knowledge from going on these historical
[Guest]: walks. So going on these walks has
[Guest]: really opened my eyes to a lot of
[Guest]: these monuments that are just lying around
[Amit Varma]: you know. So much wealth
[Amit Varma]: all around us, all my Bombay friends who
[Amit Varma]: mock Delhi for the pollution
[Guest]: and the people that is a lot more than that.
[Amit Varma]: Oh please.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about a
[Amit Varma]: character you've written about more than just
[Amit Varma]: in this book which is Jahanara
[Unknown]: who is sort of the daughter of
[Amit Varma]: Shah Jahan and she is unmarried
[Amit Varma]: and you know she is a Padshah Begum
[Amit Varma]: she is known as Begum Sahab
[Amit Varma]: and her history
[Amit Varma]: is kind of tragic and almost
[Amit Varma]: a counterpoint to her younger sister Roshanara
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know I'll challenge you on that Amit
[Guest]: and say that
[Guest]: I think it is later people who have
[Guest]: inferred that it was tragic
[Guest]: perhaps because she was unmarried
[Guest]: I wonder if she didn't actually prefer
[Guest]: it that way because she was
[Guest]: Shah Jahan's favourite daughter, eldest daughter
[Guest]: also. She was 17 when Mumtaz Mahal
[Guest]: died and half of Mumtaz
[Guest]: Mahal's wealth which was a substantial
[Guest]: amount, half of it went to Jahanara
[Guest]: Begum. So you can see
[Guest]: the way in the
[Guest]: matriarchies carry on this
[Guest]: tradition of giving wealth to their daughters
[Guest]: so she has this enormous wealth at the age of 17
[Guest]: already and she only accumulates
[Guest]: wealth because she becomes more and more
[Guest]: powerful. Shah Jahan
[Guest]: gives her villagers in her name, he gives her
[Guest]: trading ship, all the noblemen keep
[Guest]: gifting her jewels and then she becomes an immensely
[Guest]: powerful woman. Wealthy
[Guest]: and powerful and she has the talent and ambition
[Guest]: to do something with it. And I wonder
[Guest]: if she was married to somebody
[Guest]: it would be an inconsequential man because all
[Guest]: who do we have left?
[Guest]: In the wars of succession all the uncles have been
[Guest]: killed off, the cousins have been killed off
[Guest]: no powerful timid men remain
[Guest]: for her to exist. Who would she have married?
[Guest]: What kind of life would she have had? She would have had to
[Guest]: bow out of the Mughal court
[Guest]: which her younger sisters did, the ones who
[Guest]: married, they bow out of Mughal history
[Guest]: we don't hear about them ever again.
[Guest]: I think Jahanara with her ambition
[Guest]: was very happy to be the
[Guest]: unmarried daughter of the greatest
[Guest]: emperor on earth at that time.
[Guest]: You must remember that we put this in context
[Guest]: we must put it in global context. This was
[Guest]: the most powerful and financially
[Amit Varma]: wealthy empire on earth.
[Amit Varma]: So she was basically like Ivanka Trump
[Amit Varma]: Oh dear, where have we come to?
[Amit Varma]: I shouldn't have said that.
[Guest]: So you know
[Guest]: I don't think she was that unhappy
[Guest]: she had personal tragedies
[Guest]: which of us doesn't. Her beloved
[Guest]: Dara Shikoh, her brother
[Guest]: is of course killed by Aurangzeb. She loses
[Guest]: in that sense because she supported
[Guest]: Dara Shikoh so she lost that battle
[Guest]: but she won the war because Aurangzeb
[Guest]: after the death of Shah Jahan brings her
[Guest]: back to court, reinstates her as
[Guest]: Padshah Begum. Not only that
[Guest]: he allows her a home
[Guest]: outside of the Zanana
[Guest]: of the Red Fort. So she has an independent
[Guest]: luxurious lifestyle where
[Guest]: she can now create a court
[Guest]: of music. So she starts to patronize
[Guest]: musicians and poets. So
[Guest]: in the end of her life this is what she has.
[Guest]: So I don't think she is such
[Guest]: an unhappy woman at the end of the day after all.
[Amit Varma]: But in this activity, in living
[Amit Varma]: separately, in building this house of music
[Amit Varma]: she is in a microcosm doing
[Amit Varma]: what could have happened if her brother
[Guest]: Dara Shikoh had actually...
[Guest]: Well, you know Dara Shikoh is one of the great
[Guest]: what ifs of history, right?
[Guest]: But to be very honest
[Guest]: he was not a very competent ruler.
[Guest]: I don't think he would have made a very competent ruler
[Guest]: though we are instinctively drawn
[Guest]: to him because of his history
[Guest]: because of his interest in the
[Guest]: Indian literature and his
[Guest]: translating all those documents
[Guest]: and him wanting to understand
[Guest]: Indian, Hindustani literature better.
[Guest]: So we want the
[Guest]: goofy prince to have been king
[Guest]: and to have created something wonderful.
[Guest]: But I am sorry to say that he was
[Guest]: a bit of a weakling, a bit
[Guest]: of a vain man who had a tendency to
[Guest]: listen to the sycophants around him
[Guest]: who believed all that, who had
[Guest]: a rather inflated idea of what he could do
[Guest]: and could not do it. When push came to
[Guest]: shove he could not fight his brother. He
[Guest]: lost every battle against Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: So if he had won somehow
[Guest]: or the other, I am not sure the empire
[Amit Varma]: would have progressed the way it did.
[Amit Varma]: You know the reason they were fighting in the first
[Amit Varma]: place is of course the Timurid line of succession
[Amit Varma]: where it's not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: the eldest son who ascends to the throne
[Unknown]: but it's a meritocracy, you
[Amit Varma]: fight for it and whoever is left standing at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it and I don't know if that's a feature or a bug
[Amit Varma]: because the good part of it is that
[Amit Varma]: the able ruler will eventually
[Amit Varma]: in theory get there but the bad part
[Amit Varma]: of it is that you have all this politics
[Unknown]: and intrigue and mistrust
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And once Aurangzeb comes on the scene
[Amit Varma]: even though he
[Amit Varma]: rehabilitates Jahanara and all of that
[Amit Varma]: women start being
[Guest]: a little less consequential.
[Guest]: Yes, even Jahanara Begum
[Guest]: we hear much less of her
[Guest]: she is Patsha Begum
[Guest]: but I was not able to find
[Guest]: very much about her
[Guest]: about what she had accomplished post the
[Guest]: death of Shah Jahan apart from the fact that
[Guest]: she arranges for some grand weddings
[Guest]: which was very much a role that the women carried out
[Guest]: grand weddings for her nieces.
[Guest]: So she continued that nurturing
[Guest]: of the women
[Guest]: the line of the women and looking after
[Guest]: the marriages
[Guest]: so she did do that and as I said she had
[Guest]: a home of culture, of music and poetry
[Guest]: but all the great buildings
[Guest]: have now died up. There is none of this
[Guest]: commissioning of amazing grand projects
[Guest]: and Aurangzeb's daughters
[Guest]: also, we must also
[Guest]: remember that for most of their life
[Guest]: Aurangzeb is in the Deccan so it's a very different
[Guest]: atmosphere. It is not
[Guest]: the court of Delhi
[Guest]: which has been emptied now
[Guest]: out of its great musicians, its great
[Guest]: architects and its great
[Guest]: gentlemen, they have all gone away
[Guest]: so it is a very different court
[Guest]: and definitely it is not a court in which
[Guest]: the women are much in the limelight
[Guest]: I think I am not an expert on
[Guest]: Aurangzeb but it is my
[Guest]: feeling that later on he has been
[Guest]: he is so suspicious of all those around him
[Guest]: because he has been betrayed
[Guest]: this happens all the time, one daughter
[Guest]: would support another brother thinking
[Guest]: that Aurangzeb will surely now
[Guest]: pass away, he lives to the age of 90
[Guest]: but all along people think ok at 50
[Guest]: he will die, at 60 he will die, at 70
[Guest]: so the daughters support other brothers
[Guest]: in their bid for the throne. Aurangzeb
[Guest]: finds out about this and imprisons them
[Guest]: so he is shackled
[Guest]: by this great suspicion
[Guest]: of all those around him and he doesn't let
[Guest]: anybody else shine in the light the way
[Amit Varma]: Jahanara did. So in a sense they are all
[Amit Varma]: also in a manner imprisoned by
[Amit Varma]: this great opportunity that the Timurid
[Amit Varma]: line of succession also is.
[Guest]: Yes, the women
[Guest]: definitely were also
[Guest]: because in a way
[Guest]: they die out, they are not allowed
[Guest]: they don't marry, they aren't Timurid
[Guest]: contenders so they can't marry anymore
[Guest]: and so the women
[Guest]: after Aurangzeb, it would be
[Guest]: interesting to write a Daughters of the Sun part 2
[Guest]: because after that you find
[Guest]: a very different sort of woman coming to the
[Guest]: limelight, it is no longer these Timurid
[Guest]: royal women, it is
[Guest]: lower caste women who get married, concubines
[Guest]: who rise up because they are no longer
[Guest]: any more Timurid women so it goes
[Guest]: in a different direction post Aurangzeb
[Guest]: which is also interesting but yes the Timurids
[Guest]: that hold that they have over these women
[Guest]: actually ended up in a certain way
[Amit Varma]: in them dying out.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of those books waiting to be written
[Amit Varma]: do you find that what
[Amit Varma]: you are a part of in a small way
[Amit Varma]: which is this changing of this gaze
[Amit Varma]: you know, going away
[Amit Varma]: from the traditional gaze, going away from the
[Amit Varma]: male gaze, looking at it, looking at
[Amit Varma]: history differently, looking at heroism
[Amit Varma]: differently, looking at the role that
[Amit Varma]: women played in politics and all of it differently
[Amit Varma]: do you find
[Amit Varma]: that you are like one of a handful
[Amit Varma]: of voices in the wilderness or the way history
[Amit Varma]: is being practiced itself is gradually
[Guest]: changing?
[Guest]: I hope that it's changing Amit
[Guest]: it's definitely being practiced differently
[Guest]: at least with narrative history
[Guest]: I find that in the past few
[Guest]: years there have been a slew of books
[Guest]: mine is just one amongst many
[Guest]: books, amazing books have been written whether
[Guest]: Parvati Sharma's Jahangir, you know
[Guest]: Manu Pillai who's been writing, Rana Safdie who's been
[Guest]: writing, Rubilal
[Guest]: there are a number of books which are pitched
[Guest]: at the layperson so that's
[Guest]: a wonderful new thing. These are, early on we had
[Guest]: we've always had great history writers but
[Guest]: they've been academics and they've been pitched
[Guest]: at other academics you know so it hasn't
[Guest]: filtered down to the layperson
[Guest]: to the degree that I find now
[Guest]: it seems to be doing
[Guest]: whether at the academic and scholarly level
[Guest]: it is also going in a certain direction, I hope so
[Guest]: with people like Rubilal doing
[Guest]: the work she's doing, I hope so
[Guest]: you know I hope that the scholars
[Guest]: certainly people like the art historians
[Guest]: are setting the history world on
[Guest]: fire and we haven't talked so much
[Guest]: about miniatures but art history is something
[Guest]: that I use a lot when I'm researching
[Guest]: because you know we always
[Guest]: think that this physical evidence is static
[Guest]: that it's there and you can look at it
[Guest]: but it's always been the same, that's not true
[Guest]: and art historians
[Guest]: are at the vanguard of this change
[Guest]: because they are looking at these same miniatures
[Guest]: from say 500 years ago, 400 years ago
[Guest]: and they're reinterpreting them
[Guest]: in completely new ways, completely
[Guest]: novel ways which is changing then the way somebody
[Guest]: like I would write about history
[Guest]: so for example there's a miniature from the time
[Guest]: of Humayun which used to be called
[Guest]: Humayun and his brothers
[Guest]: just a very general one, if you look at it
[Guest]: it looks like a painting of somebody
[Guest]: you know who has taken a lot of
[Guest]: hallucinatory drugs
[Guest]: because it's full of colors and wild colors
[Guest]: and there are lots of figures
[Guest]: but art historians, I think it is
[Guest]: Dr. Laura Parodi has had a close look
[Guest]: at this painting which is of Humayun
[Guest]: and somebody who looks like his brother
[Guest]: Hindal next to him and
[Guest]: other gentlemen also but groups
[Guest]: of women as well and she has looked
[Guest]: at these groups of women and she has individually
[Guest]: identified them and said
[Guest]: that one group of women is clearly
[Guest]: Hamida Banu Begum, Gulbadan
[Guest]: Begum, I think Bega Begum
[Guest]: and a fourth sister and another
[Guest]: set of women is the milk mothers, perhaps
[Guest]: Mahamanga and Jidiyanga
[Guest]: so now we are looking at this
[Guest]: in a completely different light, this is not Humayun
[Guest]: and his brothers, this is a place
[Guest]: where women were very very important
[Guest]: and they have said this is probably
[Guest]: a place associated with fertility
[Guest]: rights, therefore it is probably the
[Guest]: circumcision ceremony of Akbar
[Guest]: so it is telling us a great deal about
[Guest]: what happened during circumcision ceremonies, how
[Guest]: important the women were, how important
[Guest]: fertility rights were, which was something that we had
[Guest]: not talked about at all before
[Guest]: and will completely now change the way that I
[Guest]: will write about episodes like
[Guest]: this. So yes
[Guest]: art historians are definitely
[Guest]: pushing those boundaries and
[Guest]: bringing in new ways, new interpretations
[Amit Varma]: all the time. This sounds really fascinating
[Amit Varma]: though a young millennial today
[Amit Varma]: would think oh it's like Facebook tagging, you go
[Amit Varma]: back to the past and you take a miniature
[Amit Varma]: and you tag everybody and you give
[Unknown]: the location and all that. Exactly
[Amit Varma]: kind of like that. So you know
[Amit Varma]: my listeners keep asking me on social media
[Amit Varma]: that you talk to such interesting guests, why don't you
[Amit Varma]: get some book recommendations for us
[Amit Varma]: because we want to read more on this subject
[Amit Varma]: so you know for example art history
[Amit Varma]: what do you recommend people read
[Amit Varma]: or even just history in general
[Amit Varma]: what are the books in the last few years
[Guest]: which you just thought everybody must read
[Guest]: I think for anybody
[Guest]: who is interested in gendered history
[Guest]: even Empress you know
[Guest]: the biography of Noor Jehan will change
[Guest]: the way you look at Noor Jehan. Rubilal
[Guest]: Rubilal will change the way you look at Jahangir
[Guest]: you know. So that's an important
[Guest]: book. I very much
[Guest]: enjoyed Rebel Sultans by you know
[Guest]: Manu.
[Guest]: What else would I recommend? You know I read some pretty
[Guest]: dry stuff so I don't know if I would recommend it
[Guest]: to all your listeners
[Guest]: but anything that's coming out of
[Guest]: on you know any of these coffee table books
[Guest]: on the art history, on miniatures
[Guest]: is changing all the time so it's
[Guest]: absolutely fascinating even for a lay person
[Guest]: to read because A you have the
[Guest]: images which sometimes seem
[Guest]: dull and repetitive if you just look at it
[Guest]: you know without the knowledge behind it
[Guest]: but when you are told certain details
[Guest]: you know about the
[Guest]: miniatures then you look at it
[Guest]: completely differently. For example there's a
[Guest]: painting which is used
[Guest]: constantly called Birth of a Prince
[Guest]: it's probably the birth of Salim
[Guest]: the future Jahangir and
[Guest]: when you look and I've looked at it many times and I've used
[Guest]: it in my books, in the middle is the mother
[Guest]: and all around her are what are
[Guest]: timorous looking women and some
[Guest]: Rajasthani looking women but she
[Guest]: herself is dusky you know
[Guest]: and she's clearly Rajasthani and this is her
[Guest]: Kabai herself and I think
[Guest]: you know my god the makers of Jodha Akbar
[Guest]: should have looked at this before casting Aishwarya Rai
[Guest]: because she looks nothing like this you know
[Guest]: so books on art
[Guest]: history today are amazing
[Guest]: and they will open your eyes to something
[Guest]: completely novel and a new way of seeing the past
[Amit Varma]: It's really exciting I'm going to go to
[Guest]: Amazon right after this. Can we now ask
[Guest]: what are you working on now?
[Guest]: So now I'm still in the Mughal period
[Guest]: and I'm writing
[Guest]: a history of Akbar, a biography
[Guest]: of Akbar and
[Guest]: it's very exciting for me because
[Guest]: so far I've only seen Akbar really
[Guest]: through his women so now I'm seeing
[Guest]: Akbar but with his women
[Guest]: alongside him because I think they're often written
[Guest]: out of histories of Akbar
[Guest]: you know it has as we have been
[Guest]: discussing this entire time
[Guest]: scholars tend to scrunch up
[Guest]: the history of Mughal women into one chapter
[Guest]: so you have 200 years of existence
[Guest]: changing, dynamic existence
[Guest]: scrunched up into one way
[Guest]: of being as if there is a one way in
[Guest]: 200 years things won't change you know as if food
[Guest]: won't change, etiquette won't change
[Guest]: so with Akbar I'm hoping to
[Guest]: show not just his
[Guest]: life but how from his very birth
[Guest]: from the time of you know his milk mothers
[Guest]: how all these women entered his life
[Guest]: changed him, influenced him
[Guest]: how he changed them like the
[Guest]: Rajput women and how
[Guest]: Akbar and build a I hope
[Guest]: a more complex and nuanced
[Guest]: image of this
[Amit Varma]: great Badshah. I urge you
[Amit Varma]: to leave the studio and
[Guest]: write the book fast because I cannot wait
[Guest]: to read it. Thanks so much for coming on this season.
[Guest]: Thank you so much Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode hop on
[Amit Varma]: over to your nearest bookstore and
[Amit Varma]: pick up Daughters of the Sun
[Amit Varma]: Empresses, Queens and Begums of the Mughal Empire
[Amit Varma]: by Ira Mukherjee. You can also pick up
[Amit Varma]: her previous book Heroines.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Ira on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Mukherjee at M-U-K-H-O-T-E-Y
[Amit Varma]: at M-U-K-H-O-T-E-Y
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: is supported by the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: and Independent Centre for Research and Education
[Amit Varma]: and Public Policy. You can browse
[Amit Varma]: all our past episodes at
[Amit Varma]: www.seen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Unknown]: www.seen.in, thinkpragati.com